Hare Krishna. A warm welcome to all of you for today's Gita live session. The topic for the day is art of tolerance. In life, all of us will encounter situations where we can do something about them. We can bring about some changes. This there will also be situations. There also will be circumstances which we would have no option but to tolerate. What to tolerate what? To put effort so that we can bring about a change in that situation, in that circumstances. Let us understand this from the divine instructions of Lord Sri Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. Before we get into this discussion, let's all join together, offer prayers together and seek the blessings of Srila Prabhupada, Lord Chaitanya and Lord Krishna to bless us with the right understanding. Nama om Vishnupadaya Krishna Prashtaya Bhutale Shrimate bhakti vedanta Swaminitanamine namaste Saraswate gauravani pracharine nirvishesha Shunavadi Pashatarine j shi krishna Chaitanya prabhunityananda shriadwaitagadhra Shivasadi Gauravaktarinda Namomah Krishna. Mapradayati Krishna Krishna Chaitanya. Namratushe. Namah. Namo. Brahman devaya go brahman hitayacha jagadhitaya krishna govinda yanamonamah he krishna Karunasindhu dina bandhu Jagatpati Go pesha gopika kanta radhakantanamostute taptakanchangorangi rath vrindavaneshwari vishabhanu sute devi pranami haripri van Chakal patarupyasha kripasindhubya bacha patitanam Pavna vaishnavyo Namonamah. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna Krishna Hari. Hari. Hari Rama. Hari Rama. Rama rama hari hari. It's a very interesting topic today, the art of tolerance. We see lot of people short tempered. Many people get agitated very soon. And we have people often having high blood pressure, stressed out because not able to deal with situations or circumstances. So today we are going to discuss four important aspects. I'll categorize my discussion today in four aspects. First, we'll cover why tolerance is important. Why it is important to hone our ability to tolerate things, to tolerate people, to tolerate situations, why it is important. That is the first part. Second, we'll discuss what to do when we encounter situations or circumstances which are very, very trying. It really shakes us up. We get agitated. What should we do? What should be our thinking? What should be our feeling? How we should act in such situations. Keeping in mind the instructions of the Lord knowing that we all are trying to become devotees how an ideal devotee should behave in such circumstances, we'll talk about that. Third, we'll talk about what if we come across people who are irritating us, who are harming us, who are troubling us? How do we deal with such people? Should we just tolerate or should we retaliate? Or should we just give them back? Give back what they are doing to us. So we'll discuss that. And last but not the least, when we should not tolerate scriptures don't expect us that come what may. No matter what a person does to us, we just simply tolerate. There are situations, there are circumstances where even exalted devotees, they also did not tolerate. So what are those situations where it is legitimate, where it is right, where it is okay to retaliate to not tolerate. So we'll talk about that. So these are the four important aspects which we are going to cover today. So first, why tolerance is important? I'll start with the verse from the Bhagavad Gita. This is in the fifth chapter, 23rd verse where Krishna says before giving up this present body so Krishna is giving us a goal for our lifetime. Many times we have five year goal, we have three year goal, we have a yearly goal. So this is what we have to achieve in this lifetime. Krishna is saying, before giving up this present body if one is able to tolerate the urges of the material senses and check the forces of desire and anger he is a yogi and he is happy in this world. All of us want to be happy. A common denominator in our lives is we want to be happy. Everyone is seeking happiness. Details may vary, professions may vary, nationality, gender might vary. But each one of us are trying to achieve happiness. And which is lasting in nature, which endures. That is our desire. So here Krishna is saying in the fifth chapter if one is able to tolerate the urges of the senses and check the forces of desire and anger then one will be able to experience happiness in this world. So check the force of desire, the force of anger, the urges of the senses and the mind. So we have five senses, five knowledge acquiring senses, five working senses. And all of these senses have urge. Each sense is desiring something, some gratification. And then we have many many desires. And if the desires are not getting met, then we get frustrated, we get angry. So Krishna is saying one who can control the urges of the senses and control its desires and anger he can be happy in this world. So why tolerance is important? Control the urges, tolerate the urges of the mind and the senses. Krishna is saying that will lead to you experiencing happiness in this world. That is what we are looking for. So Krishna is giving us a hint. Tolerance is so important if we want to experience happiness in this world. Second, generally when we get something desirable we become happy. It is very natural. We want something and we get that thing. We become happy. And when we get something undesirable we are distress. All of us want good health. But suddenly a disease comes and then we are in pain. We are distressed. But if we are actually in spiritual position these things will not agitate us. To reach that stage we have to practice unbreakable devotional service. Right now we all are on a roller coaster ride. Sometimes happy, sometimes distress. Sometimes we experience fame and then at times experience infamy pleasure, pain. These are all dualities of this material world. But here Krishna is giving us a formula where you can experience lasting happiness. Not that sometimes we are happy, sometimes we are in pain. Sometimes we are distressed. Sometimes we are experiencing happiness. We all have a longing, a desire to experience lasting happiness. Happiness which lasts, which endures. So here Krishna is giving us that we can achieve this by elevating ourselves to a spiritual position. Elevating our consciousness whereby we are unaffected. We are equipoised in happiness and distress. Now somebody might say our life will become very monotonous. It's not so. In fact, we will experience happiness which endures. That's what we are longing for. That's what we are aspiring for. So Krishna is saying that can be achieved if we elevate ourselves to a spiritual position, spiritual consciousness. And that can happen by practicing devotional service. Which are the aspects of devotional service we have discussed in our previous session. Nine aspects. Shavanam Kirtanam vishnu Smaranam. These all are nine forms in which we can serve the Lord. Then we don't have to struggle to tolerate. Many times we have to struggle to tolerate. We are not able to tolerate. We are getting agitated. We know it is wrong, but we can't help it. If we are in spiritual consciousness then we don't have to struggle. That tolerance, that equanimity will be a natural consequence of that spiritual consciousness. Shila Prabhupada. In 1977, when his health was deteriorating and he was in Vrindavan, his organs were not doing well. Kaviraj, a doctor was treating him. And a time came when Srila Prabhupada even stopped eating. From body perspective perspective of this body there was a lot of pain. But Prabhupada's consciousness was completely unaffected by that pain. He was very, very Krishna conscious. Even till the last date. He was dictating. Bhakti vedanta purports on a dictaphone. That is the meaning of an acharya. One who shows by example. To talk is easy but to walk the talk is not so easy. So Srila Prabhupada demonstrated that how in spite of inconveniences in this body in spite of the body full of pain one can be unaffected by such pain and be conscious of the Lord. This is from a conversation with Shila Prabhupada. This was in New York, 1966. Because we are foolish, we are trying to adjust things. That is our foolishness. Just like a railway carriage, you are being transported from one place to another. Suppose it is crowded. So instead of adjusting the crowd better tolerate for few hours and get down and go to your destination. Similarly, we may have many dangerous spots in this material life. But if we are preparing ourselves to go back to Krishna in Krishna consciousness then these things will not be cared for. They come and go. Let them happen. It's a very, very nice example. Just like we are traveling from one city to another in a train Prabhupada gives this wonderful example. If there is some inconvenience, let's say you didn't get a seat. Proper seat to seat or the bogey is quite unclean. You tolerate. You don't try to settle down peacefully. In that you'll not put extra effort to settle down very comfortably in the bogey knowing very well that in next 1 hour anyway you have to get down. So likewise to settle down peacefully and make invest all time energy to make this place comfortable is not a wise thing. Srila Prabhupada is saying that we have the goal of human form of life is to extricate ourselves from this repeated cycle of birth and death and go back to our original home, the kingdom of God. If that is the goal. Keeping that goal in mind, we should not invest lot of time and energy in settling down peacefully in this material world. Little bit of inconvenience we tolerate. We don't spend our time and energy in adjusting things. But our time and energy should go in doing the ultimate thing and that is to extricate ourselves. Some bit of inconvenience we tolerate. Just like it is very practical that if we did not get a seat in a train which is going to reach the destination in next 1 hour, it's okay to tolerate. And you will tolerate. Keeping in mind that my destination is just 1 hour from this place. If we don't have that understanding, the very fact that this is a journey I don't have to permanently be in this train makes us endure some bit of difficulties we encounter in the bogey knowing that anyway I have to get down. Same is the case when we elevate our consciousness, we will have that understanding. This is the definition of Sadhu. A saint who is a saint. A saint is called very tolerant. Tolerant. Tolerant to the utmost. So we briefly discuss why it is important to tolerate. Only if we tolerate the urges of our senses, the urges of our mind, our desires, anger we will experience happiness in this world. Then Srila Prabhupada also says that yes, when we elevate our consciousness and we are situated on a spiritual platform, tolerance will become easy. We'll be equipoised in pleasure and pain, fame and infamy. In fact, Arjuna asks Krishna what are the symptoms of a person who is stitha pragna who is self realized? And then Krishna mentions for such a person he is equipoised samadharshi. And then Prabhupada also mentions that a Sadhu is a person who is extremely tolerant. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in his Shastaksa mentions that a devotee should be like a tree. Trinad API suniche nath Taro sahisuna taro means tree. Sahisruna means tolerant like a tree. We all know that tree. How people throw stones at the tree. It gives fruit, it gives shade. In hot summer season, people can sit underneath the tree. And then people cut the trees and it gives the bark, it gives the branches are used for firewood, it gives the wood which is used for making so many things. So the whole life of a tree is all about tolerance. And therefore Chaitanya Mahaprabhu says a devotee should learn to be tolerant like a tree. Now we'll discuss what should we do? What should be our thinking? Thinking leads to feeling and then it leads to willing, which is actions. All actions are preceded by some thoughts. So what should we do when we encounter difficulties or challenges in life? What should be our thinking? What should be our feeling? What should be our willing? What action should we take? With what consciousness? With what thoughts? What feelings? So here this is in the second chapter, 14th verse. Krishna says O son of Kunti the non permanent appearance of happiness and distress and their disappearance in due course are like the appearance and disappearance of summer and winter season. They arise from sense perception, osayana bharata. And one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed. Just like we have summer seasons, we have rainy season, we have winter season. When we are in a summer season we know that another couple of months the spring season will start. Then the winter season will start. We know that season will change. It's not going to be summers throughout the year. Likewise, Krishna is saying just like the seasons come and go, likewise happiness and distress will come and go. While we are experiencing distress, we should learn to tolerate without being disturbed. While we are experiencing joy, happiness, learn to tolerate. It won't last. This too shall pass. This reminds me of a story. A king called his minister and he said can you get me something which I give to someone? And if that person is very, very happy, he will start experiencing sadness. And the same thing if I give to another person who is experiencing misery or pain in his life, he'll become happy. So the minister was quite perplexed. The same thing you give to one person, a happy person will become sad. And give to a person who is sad, he'll become happy. So he was quite perplexed. What is that thing? What is that one thing? Common thing which can be given to a person which will make a sad person happy and a happy person sad. He thought for a while and since he was quite intelligent the king expected that no one would be able to figure out what is that thing. But finally this minister came back to the king with a ring and said this is the ring which if you give to a person who is happy he will experience sadness and vice versa. The king was quite amused. He looked at the ring and guess what was there? Itched on the ring. Itched on the ring was the words this too shall pass. This too shall pass. When we are excited, we think that this excitement will last. It doesn't. When we are very depressed, very morose, going through some rough phase we get a feeling that this will last. This will continue like this. And we become concerned. We become anxious. We become worried. This too shall pass. And krishna gives a very nice example of changing seasons. Just like seasons change, likewise happiness and distress will come and go. Krishna is advising us learn to tolerate without being distressed, without being disturbed. So this is first practical instruction from the Gita second chapter. Krishna is not giving us that once you become devotee, there won't be any distress. Yes, we have to learn to tolerate. And when we elevate ourselves to a spiritual consciousness, spiritual platform, then it will be easy for us to tolerate. We'll be equipoised. Even if there is danger or suffering in Krishna consciousness, we should tolerate it. We should even welcome such danger. So this is the thinking part how a devotee should perceive a dangerous situation, a distressful situation, a problematic situation we should even welcome such danger. And we should pray to Krishna. Now Shila Prabhupada is telling us how a devotee should pray. Tatte ANU kampam Sumikshamano what should be our prayer? What should be our thinking? My dear Lord, it is Your mercy that I have been put in this dangerous position. See, devotee means change of dress. It's very easy to shave the head, to have telak just takes half an hour. But devotee means change of consciousness, change of thinking. So what should be the thinking of a devotee? Generally in this material world, with material consciousness we think why me? Why I should suffer? Why Lord, is giving me so much of misery as a devotee, think that O Lord, I am grateful to you for taking me through this situation. It is Your mercy because of which I have been put in this dangerous position. That is the viewpoint of a devotee. He doesn't regard danger as danger. Tatte Anukampa he thinks that dangerous situation is a mercy of the Lord sanctioned by the Lord for his betterment. Rather he thinks it is Krishna's mercy. Bhunjana evatma Kritam Vipakam because of my past activities now it is not just to somehow reconcile, it's a fact. All of us suffer either because of our karma or it is a very very special mercy of the Lord. These are the only two reasons why we suffer. We have examples of even pure devotees apparently suffering. It may not be because of their karmic reactions. It could be in fact, it is because of the special mercy of the Lord. So devotee thinks that O Lord, I should be suffering much much more because of all the wrong deeds I have done in this life and in my previous lives. Some I am able to remember and some I am not able to even recollect or remember. It's a fact that as you sow, so shall you reap. So rather than blaming the Lord, blaming others, he understands that I am suffering because of my own karma. And he thanks the Lord. O Lord, in fact, I should be suffering much much more. But what you are giving me is a token reaction. You are mitigating that suffering and giving me only a little. In other words, by the grace of Krishna, devotee may receive only a token punishment. Material consciousness means I should not be suffering this. Why me? Whereas spiritual consciousness means that actually I am so fallen. I have committed so many sins. Knowingly and unknowingly, I should be suffering much, much more. O Lord, you're so kind. You're giving me a token reaction. So it is the change of consciousness, change of thinking, the change of how we perceive that same situation. On the Battle of Kurukshetra, Arjuna said to Krishna now I agree that to speak, to talk about it's very easy. But to practice it in our daily lives suppose somebody is diagnosed with some fatal disease to say Krishna, it is your mercy upon me. It may not be very easy. Yes, theoretically we can understand that we have to suffer our karmic reactions. So here in the battle of Kurukshetra, we know the immortal words of Bhagavad Gita were spoken by Krishna to Arjuna. In the second chapter, Krishna talks about Atma. And he explains that how the Atma is transmigrating from one body to another. And we are not this body. And the very fact that we are not the body, we shouldn't be too attached to it, too attached to the body and everyone in relationship with this body. So after the battle of Kurukshetra, finally we know that the pandavas became victorious. And eventually Bhishma bhishma was lying on the bed of arrows and all the Pandavas and the Lord were assembled around him. And Arjuna and all the Pardonvas in fact were very griefsticken because they were very very attached to Bhishma. Although Bhishma was with Duryodhan side of Kauravas fighting against the pandavas. But still all the pandavas were very very attached to Bhishma Pitama. So when Bhishma was leaving his body, arjuna spoke these words to Krishna. These are the kind of feelings which you also will have saying that it's easy to speak but difficult to practice. It is not practical. Krishna is saying learn to tolerate without being disturbed. Yes, it's easy, but how to practice it? So here on the battle of Kurukshetra, Arjuna said to Krishna whatever you are saying is all right. Like many of you will be thinking yes, whatever you are saying, Swamij, it's all right. We have to tolerate. Yes, we are suffering because of our somebody comes and troubles us. We can always think that yes, I should be suffering much more. It's because of my bad karma. It's easy to rationalize like that. Whatever you're saying is so true. I am not this body. These are words of Arjuna. I am not this body. It's easy to understand. But when I see that my son is dying or my grandfather is dying and that I am killing, how can I be solaced simply by knowing that they are not dying but that only their bodies are changing? See here, Arjuna is talking like although he's a great devotee. He is putting himself in the shoes of an ordinary man and is saying although we are not this bodies, but when my son is dying or my grandfather is dying and I am killing them arjuna, because he had fought this battle, how can I be solaced? How? I can reconcile by knowing that they are not the bodies and that their bodies are only changing. Krishna gives example of just like in this life, from childhood to boyhood to youth, the body is changing. Tata de Hantra Prapte likewise, at the point of death, there's another change of body. And Dheera Tatra Namhuyati a sober person is not bewildered by such a change. So Arjuna is asking how am I to be solace that just the body is changing and the person is not dying. I am accustomed to thinking of them with affection in terms of the body. Yes, I want them. I want them amidst us. I am accustomed to thinking of them with affection in terms of the body. And so there must be grief and suffering. So the grief and suffering is justified. How can you say that? Yes, the body is changing. The soul never dies. It is but natural to grieve and to suffer. So Arjuna is telling these words to Krishna. In other words, what Arjuna is saying is to say is easy, that we are not the body, we are a spirit soul. That's what a common man also will feel. But in day to day life, when we encounter challenging situation difficulties, it may not be very easy. We go through a lot of pain. If there's a death in the family, we get completely rattled even though we may know that we are not the body. So what did Krishna say? Krishna did not deny what Arjuna said. Yes, he replied, that's a fact. Because you are in a bodily concept of life, deeply entrenched in the thinking that I am the body. There must be suffering. You must tolerate it. That's all. There is no other remedy. As I mentioned, if we are in a spiritual platform on a spiritual platform what is spiritual platform? Aham Brahmasmi I am a spirit soul, but we are not. We are trying to elevate ourselves to our spiritual platform. So long as we are on a material platform, thinking that we are the body, then we will suffer. We have no option but to tolerate that suffering. The suffering will come and it will affect us. So you must tolerate it. That's all. There is no other remedy. That's why it is very important for us in this human form of life. While we tolerate the pains, the challenges, the difficulties we encounter, we simultaneously elevate our consciousness to Krishna consciousness. This example I have shared in one of our previous sessions. Let's say a person is walking in a forest and forest full of thorns, twigs, pebbles, stones and he's walking barefoot. He has lost his way in the forest, suddenly he'll be pricked with a thorn and he'll be in a pain. Blood will start oozing out. Yes, he needs to tolerate that pain. He needs to somehow attend to that wound. But while he's doing that, he should also look for two things how to get out of this forest. Because so long as in the forest, the thorns, the twigs, the pebbles will keep pricking him. And second, how I can have a relatively long term solution by instead of every time putting a bandaid or dressing the wound, how I can wear some shoes or slippers so that I don't get pricked by the thorns. So while we are in this material world, krishna is saying that we elevate our consciousness, we tolerate and work towards the ultimate goal which is to come out of this forest, come out of this material existence and go back to our original home, the Kingdom of God. So we will talk more about the balance two points. The balance two points are very interesting. As I mentioned earlier. What should we think and do when someone harms us? And it is quite evident to us that he is troubling me, intentionally troubling me. He is the cause of my problems. What should we are thinking? How should we act? And the last thing is what should we not tolerate? So we'll cover this little later. We will now have Kirtans request all of you to kindly join enthusiastically, attend the kirtans, get spiritually charged and then we come back to these two points. Ram, Omar, marijuana. Marijuana. Krishna RA mari. Maram krishna mari krishna krishna krishna Marijuana. Krishna. Krishna maram ha. Everyone together a little louder. One more time. Little louder with your heart. Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hari, Nadiram harm which we wanted to cover today is when we know that someone is harming us. Someone is troubling us. We already have some questions asked on this particular aspect. What if somebody is troubling us? Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor from others. One should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor from others. If one is engaged in advancement of spiritual knowledge, there will be so many insults and dishonor from others. It is said that when a person becomes a devotee, more so, when he takes to renounce order of life, it is like a social suicide. He is not respected. That's a different thing that finally, after many, many years, when he becomes very senior devotee or advanced devotee, then people respect, they touch the feet. But in general, when a person takes to spirituality, people are critical. They at times think that he is escaping from the reality. He's not able to cope up with the pressures of the real life. He's escaping the reality. So if one is engaged in advancement of spiritual knowledge, there will be so many insults and dishonor from others. That is expected, because material nature is constituted in that way. Sometimes we have wrong expectations. So here we can set our expectation right. We are practicing Krishna consciousness. Then there will be challenges. People will pass some comments. They will criticize. When I was in the college, so there was another senior of mine who was one year senior to me. And his name was Minocha. His surname was Minocha. And he was very, very sincerely and seriously practicing Krishna consciousness. What inspired me was that whenever in the evening we would be going to a kiosk for having tea, coffee, post our college, after the end of the day college session, I would see him. We would pass through that room in the hostel where he was staying, this particular person. And he was a gold medalist in his particular branch, very, very good in his academics. And I would see from the window that he would be at six, seven in the evening, when everyone is in a very relaxed mode, he would be reading Bhagavad Gita. Typical that you have that wooden stand and the book, and he'll be very carefully attentively reading Bhagavad Gita. When there was a sports meet, he came first. He was good in sports, he was good in academics, he was a gold medalist. And he was very, very sincerely practicing Krishna consciousness. He was very, very bold. Lot of people used to tease me. In fact, people started teasing me. His name was Minocha. So people called me Junior Minocha because they also said that probably one day I'll be like him. He even has kept his hairs very short, although he was in the college. But he was very bold what people were saying. He was very confident of what he was doing. And he was marching ahead in his Krishna consciousness with full confidence in what he was doing. And when I saw her that he's excelling in academics, he was a gold medalist. And he's also sincerely practicing Krishna consciousness. Primaphase. One thing became very evident that what he is trying to practice is something genuine, something serious. Because he's intelligent. He's intelligent, he can easily make out. He is not a Buddha, he's a branch topper, he's a gold medalist. He can easily make out what is worthwhile to invest his time and energy. In spite of he being so called Ostracized sidelined, he was quite strong in his convictions. So that impressed me a lot. Even if devotees see the mischief monkers, they do not accuse them for the sufferings inflicted. Many times when we see somebody inflicting some pain on us, some misery, passing some critical comments, we blame that person and we say that he is the one who is making me miserable. And a normal behavior is we retaliate, we give back. But if you remember, in the previous point we discussed, a devotee thinks that when he goes through some pain or difficulty, he knows that he is going through this difficulty or suffering because of his own deeds. Yes, an immediate cause may be that person but actually he is just instrumental in delivering what is due to us. Just like for example, if a person has taken a loan and he is not able to pay the money back to the bank, the bank will send someone to retrieve that amount to claim that amount back. Now if that person who has come to collect the money, if he is using harsh words, we can't blame him. It's a fact that we have taken the money and maybe because we are not able to pay, the bank is taking the next steps which may be required. So even if we see mischief mongers, we do not accuse them for the suffering inflicted. They take it for granted that the mischief monger is made to act by some indirect cause and therefore they tolerate the suffering. Mischief monger may be an immediate cause but the ultimate cause is our own deeds, our karma. He tolerates the suffering thinking them to be God given in small doses for otherwise the suffering should have been much greater. We covered briefly this part. This is in the Shimad Bhagwatam first Kanto 17 chapter. We should not be disappointed as Pralad Maraj never became disappointed. Although he was teased in so many ways. His father Rina Kashipu was chastised prahlad Maharaj tried to torment and trouble Prahlad Maharaj in so many ways. Somehow he wanted his son to stop this Krishna conscious business. He was served with poison, he was thrown amongst the serpents and he was thrown from the hill. He was put under the feet of an elephant. Imagine Prahlad Maharaj. Small boy. His only apparent mistake was that he was practicing Krishna consciousness. He was thrown in a pit full of snakes, was tried to be trampled under the feet of elephants in so many ways. Therefore, Chaitanya Mahapuru instructs don't be disappointed kindly forbear kindly tolerate Trinada peace, huniche natharoda peace ahisuna be it more tolerant than a tree one should be meek and humbler more than a straw, a grass trina trinathi sunich and a more tolerant than a grass. What happens a grass when we trample? Next moment it comes back. So Chitana Mahaprabhu says if we have to chant the names of the Lord constantly, then we have to make a mala of this particular verse. Trinada peace, sunni chena taura peace. Ahishnuna. With these words written and wear it around the neck so that it constantly reminds us that this should be our consciousness, this should be our attitude. There's a very interesting story in Srimad Bhagavatam about Chitraketu. Once it so happened that Chitra Ketu was wrongly cursed by Mother Parvati when he saw Mother Parvati and Lord Shiva in close proximity and he smiled, mother Parvati felt insulted as if he is smiling sarcastically. Seeing them in close proximity, mother Parvati cursed Chitraketu. Actually, Chittraketu was not smiling and it had no wrong intentions. But Mother Parvati cursed Chitraketu. Now Chitraketu, what did he think? What did he feel? What did he do? Chitraketu said oh mother, you are now unnecessarily angry. But since all my happiness and distress are distined by my past activities why are these pastimes there in the Shimad Bhagavatam? To give us an example of what should a vaishnava a devotee think like? Although yes, it may be very difficult for us but at least we should know that this is an ideal behavior. This is an ideal thinking. We should aspire for just like a child when he goes to the school, ultimately he has to be a graduate. He has to become a learned man. Although he may be in Kg, he may be a first standard, second standard one day he has to aspire to be a graduate. So, O mother, you are unnecessarily angry. But since all my happiness and distress are distined by my past activities, I do not plead to be excused or relieved from your curse. Although what you have said is not wrong, please let whatever you think is wrong be pardoned. Although he knows that she has chastised him unnecessarily, but he says whatever if you feel that I have done a mistake, please pardon me rather than retaliating knowing that all the happiness and distress we encounter is because of my past deeds. There's another example of Haridas thakur. He is called Namacharya. He used to chant 18 hours a day. Although he was born in a Mohammedan family, but Chittana Mahaprabhu called him Namacharya. He was so attached to the holy Name of the Lord constantly chanting the names of the Lord Haridas Thakur was beaten with cane in 22 bazaars but he was never disturbed. Now he can always say I am chanting 18 hours what mistake I have done. Why Lord is taking me through such tribulations? He was beaten caned in 22 marketplaces but he never he was not disturbed. Instead he smilingly tolerated the beating. Despite the disturbing dualities of this material world, devotees are not disturbed at all. If you remember why the devotees are not disturbed? Because they are situated on a spiritual platform. Their thinking is spiritual, their consciousness is I am not this body, I'm a spirit's aham brahmas me. Because they fix their mind on the lotus feet of the Lord and concentrate on the Holy Name of the Lord they do not feel the so called pains and pleasure. By chanting the names of the Lord and by fixing the mind on the lotus feed, you come to the spiritual platform, you elevate your consciousness. They do not feel such pains and pleasures caused by the dualities of this material dualities of this material world means pains and pleasure, fame and infamy heat and cold, fame and infamy dualities so one will be equipoised. One does not feel the pains and pleasures caused by the dualities of this material world. This is in the Shimad Bhagwatam 6th Kanto 17th chapter envious people create many impediments to krishna consciousness movement. But we have to tolerate them. See, many times people are acting out of ignorance. They themselves are miserable and they also try to make others miserable. There is no alternative but to be tolerant. One must be peaceful and depend on Krishna in all circumstances. These are the ornaments of a sadhu. That's what Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also says. We have to be tolerant than a tree, humbler than a blade of grass. When someone is inflicting pain on us, we should think actually the Lord has sanctioned this. But Lord is very kind. I am getting a token reaction. This person is an immediate cause. The ultimate cause is my own misdeeds which I have done in this life and my previous lives. Lord is very kind. He has given me a token reaction. And if we are not on a spiritual platform, it will be difficult for us. Tolerate. It will breed. Anger, retaliation, revenge, envy, fear all these kind of emotions, it will breed. But if you are on a spiritual platform, we can tolerate. And in a very practical way, with intelligence whatever needs to be done to handle that situation, we can do it. So this is the third aspect. What if someone harms us? Yes, as a matter of duty, whatever needs to be done. Let's say for example, somebody steals something from us as a matter of duty we may have to go to the police. We may have to file a case or a complaint. But what should be our thinking? We cannot be fully boiling with anger. Happened has happened. But how do we reconcile? Yes, whatever I am going through is because of my past deeds. Sometimes it so happens that we get overwhelmed with that situation. And whatever needs to be done of filing a complaint, going to the police station, doing something to retrieve that money back that also we don't do. And the last thing which we wanted to cover was what should we not tolerate? In one of our previous session which we talked about anger we talked about rightful anger. In fact, sometimes it is justified for the parents to be angry with the children and not tolerate them. Tolerate their wrong behavior. Sometimes punishment is justified. Just like we have rightful angers. There are occasions in which we should not tolerate. So the devotees are never inclined to counteract personal defamation. Suppose somebody criticizes me or criticizes that person, he should tolerate. He passes some comments, sarcastic remark or insults. Tolerate. The devotees are never inclined to counteract personal defamation, curses, negligence, et cetera. As far as such things are concerned in personal affairs the devotee do not care for them because he is on a spiritual platform. He is trying to control his mind, control his senses, control his anger, control his desires. He is working on some very noble projects. But in case of their being performed against the Lord and his devotees then the devotees take very strong action. If it is insult to oneself, he tolerates. But if it is to the Lord and to other devotees, he should not tolerate. We have example of Nithyananda Prabhu was hurt by Jagai and Madhai. And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not tolerate. He became very angry. In fact, he wanted to kill those two brothers. But Nithyananda Prabhu fell at his feet and pleaded to forgive them. One should be very meek and humble in his personal transactions. And if insulted, a Vaishnava should be tolerant and not get angry. So here there's a demarcation. If it is insult to oneself, one should tolerate. How do we tolerate? We think that I should be suffering much, much more. But Lord is giving me a token reaction. And this person, although he is an immediate cause but he is delivering what is due to me. But if the blasphemy is against one's Guru or other Vaishnavas, one should be as angry as fire. I gave the example of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So I'm sure what we have discussed will bring forth many questions. In fact, we have lot of questions which has come today. So we'll spend the balance 20 minutes taking up these questions. This question is from Amita Shivastava. Sometimes I am unable to control anger. Please help me. It's a fact that when we start practicing Krishna consciousness it is not that moment we start practicing Krishna consciousness, we'll become perfect. It is not that the moment we get admitted in a hospital, we'll get cured. So Prabhupada said we are in a spiritual hospital. We have started taking the medicine. It will take time for the material disease to subside. Till such time, we have to tolerate Utsaha, Dhairiya and Nischat. We have to be patient. We have to be enthusiastic in following the process. And we have to be determined. Yes, it's a fact that when we elevate in Krishna consciousness we'll have better control over our desires, better control over anger, better control over our senses and on our mind. This question is from Abhishek Kumar. I have a question from last session root of all fears that how can we get free from the fear of public speaking. Yes, when we come to spiritual platform, we get freed from all kinds of fear. But to give you a very very practical, down to earth advice there is a group called the Toastmasters Club. It's there in practical all major cities of the world. Toastmasters Club. Anyone can join. It helps one hone up his public speaking skills. And I have personally attended some of the sessions. And I have seen people who are very very timid who are very fearful in speaking in public. It provides an opportunity for a person to speak and other members encourage. It's a nice platform where one can learn public speaking. So please explore that possibility. Toastmasters Club. You can Google and get more details. This question is from Bodharamarao. Sometimes I lose my sense because I become very angry. Especially when I hear unpleasant words towards my parents or family by other relatives. So this is something similar to what Arjuna was saying that yes, what you're saying is so true. But then it's difficult for me to am. When I see Bhishma getting killed, how am I to solace that just the body is changing. I am attached to that body, to that person. So likewise it is natural. While we are in this bodily concept of life in this material world with this material consciousness there is no shortcut. We can always have some quick fix solution. But quick fix solution is a quick fix solution. If you are looking for a permanent solution which is addressing the root cause, it will take time. We are following a process which is authorized. But while we are following this process, we have to tolerate. That's what even Krishna says. Krishna did not deny. Yes, he said it's a fact. Because you are in bodily concept of life, there must be suffering. Because we are materially attached. Because we are in material consciousness there will be anger, there will be fear, there will be anxiety. In fact, the more we want to come out of it more sincerely we should practice the principles of Krishna consciousness. That should be a motivation for us. That if I become a nice devotee I will come out of all these shortcomings in my behavior. I am chanting and following Krishna consciousness but unable to control the anger because of it I have lost good relationship with my family members. Kindly advise. Initially when we come to Krishna consciousness it's a mix of many many things. As I said, people will sometimes criticize. People will pass some sarcastic remarks. And we ourselves will find ourselves neither here nor there. Sometimes when we see temple devotees, we know, okay, they are full time devotees. At least they are practicing Krishna consciousness. And here I am. Neither I am like my friends who are completely materialistic nor I am like a devotee who is fully Krishna conscious serving the Lord 24 hours a day. So we may pass through a sage where we might feel that I am neither here nor there or having legs in two boats. It is a scenario which you will pass through. But for sure, if we endure, if we tolerate very soon you will find yourself predominantly in one boat. Just like I gave the example of my senior in college. His name was Minoja. He had decided, come what may, he will practice Krishna consciousness. There were people who were passing sarcastic remarks. But he was not deterred. He was not affected by such remarks. So when we elevate our consciousness, come to spiritual platform. And by the way, spiritual platform is not something which is a future postdated check. It is not a zero one logic. One fine day, after 30 years, 40 years, 50 years of practice, you will come to spiritual. And that day at that time you will not be unaffected by anger and things like no, it is not a zero one logic. Just like it is not black or white. There are many many shades of gray between black and white. So likewise, every step we take, everything we achieve in Krishna consciousness it is taking us towards that spiritual platform. The more we move towards that platform just like the shades of grey to that extent we will experience relief from these base qualities in our character and behavior. This question is from Rohit Bhalera. When we are tolerant many times people take it as we are very soft and can misuse it. How do we find right balance of being tolerant but also ensure we are not exploited? While we are practicing Krishna consciousness we need guidance of experienced devotees. Many times we have a sentimental understanding of things. Just like sentimental understanding of things would be if someone slaps on one cheek, you can show the other cheek. That's not what Krishna consciousness is all about. In fact, the whole gita was spoken in the battle of Kurukshetra where Arjuna was reluctant to fight. And the whole thing was spoken to inspire Arjuna to do his duty even though it is tantamount to killing his own near and dear ones. So killing, violence, aggression all has a place. But we need some guidance, some mature understanding. Even chastisement, even Retaliating have a place. But we need some guidance. So if you are in a situation where strongly in dilemma and it is affecting you very badly, try if you can, take guidance from the devotees whom you are regularly in touch with. Otherwise find out such devotee and take guidance on a regular basis. You will get more practical tips on how to deal with situations. This question is from Devan Shimore. How much to tolerate? Especially when one is trying to bring discipline in their children. As I mentioned, as parents, as teachers we have to at times even be harsh to correct them. Prabhupada Chastised, his disciples at times he was angry at them for their correction. So the session is not about tolerate everything. This reminds me of a prayer which is called the Serenity Prayer. The prayer goes something like this I may not remember the exact words but I'll share with you the essence of that prayer. O Lord, let me change things which I can change. O Lord, let me tolerate things which I cannot change. It's a fact that in life there are many things which we can change. The children unruly we can correct them, we can chastise them, we can do something about. They mending their ways. And there are also situations in life which we want to change. But we can't. Just like this current pandemic. Everyone wants this pandemic to end. But then we have to tolerate so. O Lord, let me tolerate things which I cannot change. Let me change things which I can in life always there are things which we can change, we can do something about. And there are things which we have no option but to tolerate. Now the next question is what to change and what to tolerate? This is something similar which is being asked how much to tolerate, what to tolerate, what to not tolerate and work towards changing that particular situation or a person or a behavior. So the Serenity prayer says O Lord, let me change things which I can. Let me tolerate things which I can't. And O Lord, give me the intelligence, give me the wisdom, give me the good sense to differentiate what I have to tolerate and what I have to change. Many times, if we try to change things which we have to tolerate we will be frustrated and we will spoil a person. If we tolerate what actually we should strive to change. Just like in this case of children. They're not doing homework. They are very, very frivolous. They want to play the whole day. Now, one thing is you tolerate that behavior as a parent and who knows, you may spoil the child. So you should do something about it to drive the right values in the child. So that's why it said we can change things. We can tolerate few things and Lord has to guide us. We can beg the Lord for that discernment, for that discrimination, what to tolerate and what to change. This question is from Muskan Mittal. When all people irritate you, sometimes I think I am a problem. Actually, when we consider that I am no good, I am a problem. I am the cause of all the things. It is quite possible that we will lose our self esteem, lose confidence in ourselves and feel ourselves as losers. Devotees of the Lord are not losers. They understand that yes, it's a fact that we suffer because of our past deeds. Even though somebody is troubling me, he a devotee, may think that he is not the ultimate cause, he's the immediate cause but then does not curse himself that I am no good, I'm good for nothing, I am so fallen. He understand it's because of past deeds. In the past, in ignorance, I have done so many wrong things because of which I am suffering. So to curse oneself whereby one's self esteem, confidence in oneself also gets eroded is not very good. This question is from Sarbani Mukherjee. Is it true that if we cry or become very sad about our parents who have passed away it will affect them negatively? I'm not very sure how will it affect them. But it is natural as human beings to experience grief, experience pain because of our attachments. But there are many instructions of the Lord in the Bhagavad Gita how we have to regulate our attachments. Attachments will always result in pain and grief. The more we are attached, more will be the pain. So in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that how we should strive to have Lord as a focal point the center in our lives and around the life around the Lord we can build other person becomes the center point of all my attachment. Then definitely in the long run we will experience grief and pain. So it is natural as human beings to experience some grief when some are near and dear ones pass away. But keeping the instructions of Bhagavad Gita we can understand what is the right way to go about handling that situation. What should be our thinking, what should be our feeling and what should be our willing? This question is from Virendra. I am unable to attend even online Satsang nowadays due to long time work hours. I am lacking in Sadhu Sangha these days which is important in progress of Bhakti and how devotee association develops. Yes, one can be in challenging circumstances where it's difficult for us to even find time for chanting, for reading, for hearing and all we have just like we have these days sessions happening on YouTube we can always catch up later on if we don't have dedicated time. We can try hearing such lectures while we are traveling or worst scenario while we are having our food. Although that's not the best scenario, we should focus on our eating. But then in case we haven't got any time, we all have to eat, all have to have prasadam. We all have to travel to our workplace. We can utilize this time. This is kind of a worse scenario where we can't find dedicated time for these activities. This question is from Deepthi Mehta. If we are too tolerant, people think us to be fools then what to do? That's why I'm saying we don't have to be too tolerant. Sometimes we have to go about bringing about a change in that person. In that situation we don't have to always tolerate. That's why I said the serenity prayer. And sometimes there are situations which we have to tolerate and we need fine discretion discrimination. What to tolerate? What to change? I gave example of children. If they are very playful, they don't do their homework then we don't have to tolerate. So there is something called as our consciousness in the background. If we are Krishna conscious have a Krishna conscious even we may not suppose somebody is not. We have lended money to someone and he is not paying us back. Yes. As far as thinking is concerned, I am going through a painful situation. I can always see that I am suffering because of my own misdeeds. But externally I may not tell that person. I still as a matter of duty will ask my money. I will chase and do whatever is required to get my money back. But worst scenario, if I don't get my money back, I will not be completely devastated. Because I have in my background that whatever I am going through is sanctioned by the lord, based on my karma and without getting disempowered, frustrated, angry and not taking any steps feel completely dejected, demoralized, morose. Rather we think and be proactive in taking whatever needs to be done in that particular situation. So in practical life, what we are sharing this is not that we have to just tolerate. If we see holistically, we are getting a picture that human form. Let me just summarize for all of you. Although it may look like there is apparent contradiction in what we have so far discussed, on one side we are saying we should tolerate. The other side we are saying that no, we should also not tolerate everything and strive to bring about some change. Overall, what Prabhupada is saying that human life is very precious. We should not endeavor too much to settle down peacefully in this material world. Just like the example of the bogey you're traveling from place A to place B. It's a journey. While you are in that journey, there will be some inconvenience. Take that inconvenience in stride and never miss that. Ultimately you're going to the final destination. The final destination is spiritual elevation to Krishna consciousness. To come out of this material world. To go back to our original home. That's the final destination. While we are in this material world, there will be ups and downs. There will be good and bad. There will be fame and infamy. To some extent we have to tolerate. Why we have tolerate knowing that when we are in a bogey there is some bit of uncleanness. We don't focus completely. Invest all our energy in keeping that compartment all pick and span painting the walls. We know that it's a journey and we focus on the main thing that is the destination. The reason why we are traveling. Having said that, when someone troubles us, one thing is we can retaliate. We feel anger. He has messed up my life. He is the cause. A devotee thinks that whatever is coming in his life is actually because of his karma. That's why we see everyone is enjoying or suffering differently. Some people have all good relations. People respect them practically. Apparently things are all fine with them in terms of their relationship with other people. And some people find themselves in situation where everyone is troubling them. So all of us are getting what is due to us based on our past karmic reaction. A devotee thinks like that. He doesn't is full of anger and retaliation. And as a matter of duty, whatever needs to be done, he does it in an empowered state. So that is the thing. And as I mentioned always in life there are some things.