Hare Krishna. A warm welcome to all of you for today's Gita live session. The topic for the day is being grateful. They say attitude of gratitude is something which we have to very sincerely try to achieve. It can take us places and it can help us to ward through many, many ups and downs in our lives. So, before we get into details and talk what Gita has to tell us, what instructions Krishna has shared with us, let's all pray together. Please join me in offering the prayers. You can also fold your hands and after the prayers, we will get into the discussion. Nama om Vishnupadaya Krishna prashtaya Bhutale shimate bhakti vedanta Swamimine namaste saraswate gauravani pracharine nirvishesha shunnavadi pashatarina jay sri Krishna chaitanya prabhu nityananda Shri advaitagadhara Shivasadi gaurabhakta vrindam namo mahavadanyaya Krishna premapradayate Krishna Krishna chaitanya namratushe namah. Namo. Brahman. Go, Brahmani. Hitayacha. Jagaditaya Krishna go Vindaya namo. Namah. He krishna Karuna sindhu dina Bandhu jagat pate go pesha gopika kanta RA Adha kantanamosuthe Taptakanchangorangi radhe vrindavaneshwari vishwanu sute devi pranami haripri Vanchakarubhyascha kripasindhub vaja patitanam Pavna vaishnav namonamaham. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Rama. Hari Rama. Rama. Rama. Hare. Hare. Our minds are compared to a thought factory. Just like you have a factory in which some products are being manufactured. Likewise, in the factory of mind, thoughts are being manufactured. On an average day, an average person thinks around 60,000 thoughts. It may vary from person to person. But on an average, it's 60,000 thoughts per day. It's a huge number. The sad part is most of our thoughts in fact, they have quantified 77% on an average of what we think. Again, it varies from person to person. That's why I'm saying average 77% of what we think is negative and counterproductive. Many of the diseases are psychosomatic diseases. In other words, mind plays a very big role in these diseases. It's not because of some bacteria. It's not because of some virus. I'm not talking about the coronavirus or the present pandemic. But in general, around 80% of the diseases are having a big contribution from our mind. Because of anxiety, because of worry, because of negative thoughts. It said that mind is also like a wild horse. It keeps running day and night. Day and night. It keeps running even in the nighttime. You might be lying on the bed. The body might be on the bed. But the mind is racing. And that's why many times we see people in spite of having slept for 7 hours, 8 hours on the bed morning when they get up, they are groggy. They feel like sleeping more. They feel like tired. So it's a fact that we all need to learn how to tame our minds. The factory which is producing thoughts just like in any factory there is a QC department which controls the quality of the products. Likewise, we also have to ensure the thoughts which are being produced in our minds are pure thoughts, positive thoughts and thoughts in connection with the Lord. In the 18th chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, krishna gives his most confidential instruction. Sarvaguyatamambhuya shunume paramam VA chaha paramam means the highest. After having spoken the entire gita, Krishna says now I am going to tell you the highest instruction. Shunu me paramambachah. And the next words Krishna says mana think of me. Although it might look to be a very simple instruction, but it's very profound. That's why the name of our institution is International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Thinking about Krishna. Conscious about Krishna. Conscious about Krishna's instructions. Conscious about Krishna's restrictions. So today we're going to talk about what role gratitude plays in we taming our mind. We all have heard about or seen a sunflower. It is called a sunflower. Many of you may not be aware the sunflower is always facing the sun. That's why probably it's called sunflower. So in other words, if the sun rises in the east and sets in the west as the sun traverses or relative to earth, the sunflower also moves in that direction, always facing the sun. Likewise, if we also can cultivate an attitude, that's why it's called attitude of gratitude. If we can cultivate an attitude whereby in spite of the ups and downs, in spite of all the good and bad in this world, in spite of all the challenges we might encounter, if we are in our attitude having gratitude, then we are aligned to the principle which the sunflower follows. We see the positives even in bad situations. It is possible and it is not impractical. I am going to share with you a few tips today what we can do to actually cultivate this attitude of gratitude in our life. A lot of people crib, cry, always in a mode of being critical, always negative, jealousy, envy, all this are part of their mindset. This can derail our thinking and thereby our relationships, our attitude in general. So there was once a lady. This story is from China. The lady by name Lily, not Li. L Y. It's a Chinese name. L-I-L-I. So she got married. And after marriage she went to her husband's place to stay. And in that house, the husband and his mother was there. Right from day one. There was a chemistry mismatch between this lady and the mother in law. The mother in law was quite short tempered and for small, small things she would pass some comments. And she had some habits which was difficult for Li to align with. She found her to be very like a dictator. She wanted things to happen in a particular way. So as days passed by, invariably there would be some altercations, some fights, some misunderstandings, some arguments between Lily and the mother in law. The husband in between tried to play the balancing act, tried to pacify Lili and also tried to orient his mother. But somehow, as days passed by, things started deteriorating as far as the relationship is concerned. And the day came when this lady Lili became very frustrated, got very upset, and she decided to even leave the house as a last resort. She thought of her father's friend, who was running a business dealing with medicinal herbs. So she went to this person, Mr. Huang, and said the whole thing explained that how this lady is really getting on my nerves, and it's very difficult to be with her. She is spoiling even my relationship with my husband. My married life is completely messed up. Can you please help me? So Mr. Huang heard her out and then said, what do you want? She said, in that house, either she can live or I can live. Both of us cannot live together. So can you help me? This time he was very upfront, says, can you help me get rid of her? So Huang was surprised. He says, what do you want? He says, can you give me some herbs which are actually poisonous, which can eventually kill her? So Huang was quite surprised. Nevertheless, since she has approached and she was quite concerned about what's going on in her personal life, he decided to help her. He went inside his office and came back with some packets of herbs. He said, I have got together these herbs. These herbs, yes, they are poisonous, but they will act very slowly over a period of few months, maybe six months. Because if I give you something which will act immediately, everyone, without a doubt, will have suspicion on you, and you will be in problem, because they know that you're not getting along, and maybe you were instrumental in administering poison to her. So this herbs will act very slowly. All you have to do is in the meals you cook, just little bit. You add and administer this herbs, and over a period of few months, she will develop the poison in her body, and she will even die. She was ready to accept this doesn't matter, even if it takes few months. And Mr. Huang also informed this lady that the next few months, I have some instructions for you, some do's and don'ts while you cook the food and add these herbs, you also have to follow this very important prescription. I am your well wisher. And the prescription is that during these few months, you should not get into any argument with your mother in law. No argument, .1.2. Be fully obedient. Whatever she says, whatever she wants, just respect her. And third, always look at the positives. Even if she is grumbling, even if she passes some comments, just be positive. Look at the positives empathize with her. Try to understand her perspective. Try to understand what made her speak like this. Give the benefit of doubt and stay positive. Be grateful. So she understood. Yes, after all, it's a question of few months. She will follow whatever Mr. Huang had told her to do. And she went back. And from day one, she started cooking and adding these herbs and very diligently followed the prescription given by Mr. Huang. Did not argue with the mother fully obedient, respected her and was always trying, although it was quite challenging for her, was trying to be positive, trying not to argue, trying always to empathize with her. And as days rolled by, month after month, she started observing something very wonderful. The relationship between the two, between her and the mother in law started becoming very cordial, very friendly. In fact, she realized that her mother in law, after all, she is not a bad lady. After all, she is good. Maybe in the first few days I was impatient, I couldn't understand her. And the mother in law in turn started telling. In fact, one day she overheard mother in law speaking over phone and she said, actually, I'm quite blessed to have a daughter in law like her. She's almost like my own daughter. I don't have a daughter, but she is like a daughter. The relationship we have now is like between a mother and a daughter. I am very blessed. I'm very fortunate to have her in our family. So they actually became very friendly, would spend lot of time together. And just like a mother and a daughter, they became attached to each other. By then, few months had passed. By then this lady, Lily realized that for the last few months I have given the herbs and it's a big mistake and a blunder from my side, because I did that without truly understanding the nature of my mother in law, without realizing the truth that actually my mother in law is a wonderful person. She rushed back to Mr. Huang and said, I have made a blunder, I have done a big mistake. Inadvertently, unknowingly, unintentionally, I misunderstood her. And as a result, I had come to you last time seeking help, and you had given me these herbs which were poisonous. And now those herbs may start acting. You said few months, it will take. But somehow, now that I have a cordial relationship, I don't want my mother in law. Is there something which you can do, which is an antidote which can nullify the effects of the herbs? So Mr. Huang looked at her, smiled and said, don't worry. In fact, the herbs which I gave you were for general health, full of vitamins and minerals. In fact, last time when I came you, I could realize that your attitude towards her, your attitude in general, where you are completely focused on the negatives, always looking at faults, that was the root cause of the problem. I could identify that. And the reason I gave you this prescription was for you to realize the problem is with you, not with her. In real life scenarios, it may not be the case that the problem is always with one person. Yes, there could be problem with other person also. But we can have good relationships, cordial relationships. We can deal with other people. If in general in our lives we cultivate the attitude of gratitude, looking at the positives, even the Bhagavatam teaches us. In fact, the Bhagavatam says that when a devotee goes through a reverse situation or some challenges what should be his or her thinking? Eventually it is all about thinking, our consciousness, our attitude. In companies also people have realized it is not your skills, it's not your abilities because skills can be learned. But if a person has bad attitude, if he does not have good interpersonal skills, if he is not positive then he'll not be very efficient and productive in the long run. He'll not have good relationships, he'll not be cordial, he'll not be obedient and things like that. So if we cultivate this attitude, the right attitude whereby so Bhagavatam we were talking about Bhagavatam Bhagavatam says Tatte Anukam pam sumikshamano bhunjana evatma Kritam Vipakam when a devotee goes through some reversal instead of blaming other person, blaming the circumstances, blaming situations, that's what we do. We always find faults with others. Because of you, today I am miserable. You have messed up my life. Yes, it may be a fact that the other person has played a big role in messing up our lives. But what Bhagavatam is saying, how a devotee should interpret, how he should think and the Bhagavatam says bhunjana Evatma Kritam vipakam it is my doing. It is because of me. It's a fact. Every one of us is getting good or bad in our lives because of our own karmas. Krishna says samoham Sarvabhutaeshu I am equal to everyone. Then why do we see some people with good attitude, some people with very trying circumstances, some people are apparently happy, some people are suffering very miserably. It's because of our karma we get placed in particular circumstances, situations. So a devotee actually starts thinking that it is my doing, I deserve it. He may be instrumental in giving what is what I deserve. And then rather than that's why you have the circle of influence and you have a circle of concern. A devotee acts in a circle of influence. Rather than always blaming the circumstances, situations, people around us, he acts in a circle of influence and he says what he can do about it. Yes, it's because of my doing, my karmic reaction. Today I am in this situation. Bunjana evatma Kritam vipakam hiddhavag bapubir vidadan namaste with his heart with his mind, with his words mind is involved with his words with his heart he engages in serving the Lord vidadhan namaste vidadhan means the Supreme Lord namaste offer obeisances to me glorifies the Lord Jive mukti padhaya bhag one who lives with that consciousness is rightful here for liberation from this material existence. So we'll talk about some practical ways in which we can cultivate this attitude. Just like you have. We all invariably in today's world more so in present time, most of the people are on laptops or on their computers. Everything is happening virtually on zoom. So we all have experience of laptops. Invariably, a laptop has memory, a hard disk, and at times the data can get infected. Laptops can get infected with some viruses. And that's why to secure our laptop, to protect from viruses. Just like we have the coronavirus which infects the lungs, infects which is infecting lot of people. Likewise there are viruses which are malwares, which can infect the computer. Now, the computer can do wonders, it can process lot of instructions very speedily, very fast, it can execute those instructions. But if a very very good computer with good memory, with good Ram, with good hard disk, with very good processing abilities is infected with viruses, it can mess up the whole thing. I remember one time having lost a lot of data because of virus. And virus sometimes can play havoc on the system. It can delete files, it can rename files, it can convert files into some numbers. And for protection, we require antivirus. Just like in present times, everyone is talking about vaccines, different states, different countries. It's a race who will get the vaccine first, because it takes time to produce that many vaccines. Now, how to prioritize whom to give first? So, likewise, a computer also requires a good antivirus. And there are many good antivirus programs or other softwares available, which you can install and you can run. And when you install an antivirus and run it, it works in the background, it protects the viruses which attack the softwares or the data which is there in the system. And you can periodically scan the system just to ensure that it is all perfectly fine, protect from different kinds of attacks, malwares and different kinds of other programs. So, just like a system requires an antivirus, likewise we also require an antivirus in our mind body system, which can protect us from all the crap, all the viruses of predominantly five kind of viruses calm the lusty thoughts. It can create havoc, more so in present times with so many allurements, so many temptations, so many adult sights, so many things titillating our senses lust, greed, envy, calm, crowd, lobe, anger, jealousy, all these kind of viruses can infect our minds our thinking. We can become very negative in our outlook and can have a very, very bad attitude. So, just like a machine requires an antivirus, likewise on a day to day basis, just like our body gets dirty, we take a bath in the morning and then we cleanse ourselves. We cannot have a situation where we'll not get dirty, we cannot have a situation where we'll not perspire. Even if we are sitting in a closed room in an AC environment, still we all get dirty. And just like we have made it a habit to take bath on a daily basis, one day if we don't take bath we feel so uneasy, so uncomfortable. Not necessary. We take bath when we are dirty. Likewise, on a daily basis, if we take bath in the Genesis water of the Gita, which is compared to the Genjis water, then all those viruses which infect us I talked about this virus, kamakrod Mohlo Matsaria we can be freed from all these viruses and we can have the right kind of thoughts, pure thoughts, and thereby have the right attitude. So I'll just read out from Gita Mahatmya what are the glories of reading Bhagavad Gita on a daily basis? This is from Gita Mahatmya verse number one if one follows the instructions of Bhagavad Gita krishna has given valuable instructions for the entire mankind which have stood the test of time. In fact, one thing which surprises me is that we are living in a world where everything is in a flux. Things are rapidly changing. In that sense we are living in a very technologically advanced world. Anything happens anywhere in the world the information reaches to everyone practically in no time with all this Twitter and Facebook and all this apps. So here in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna is I mean if we follow the instructions of this Gita Mahatma says if one follows the instructions of Bhagavad Gita one can be freed from all anxieties and miseries. Behind anxieties and miseries are the thoughts. I'm sure all of you are aware. So a thought reap a word. So a word reap an action. Behind an action there are words. So an action reap a habit. So a habit reap a character. So a character reap your destiny. So the building blocks of a person's character, a person's destiny is the thoughts, the thinking like I talked about 60,000 thoughts on an average a person thinks. So those thoughts are just not some isolated thoughts. They eventually translate into words, into actions, into our habits, into our character and eventually our destiny. The building block of our destiny, our life, our circumstances is our thinking, our thoughts. So here it says one will be freed from all anxieties and miseries of life and one's next life will be spiritual. Just like in the Bhagavad Gita arjuna was inflicted with the Hathma buddhi. His thoughts were all around I and mine, my family, my dynasty. What is the use of fighting this battle? What is the use of getting back the kingdom which will be tainted with the blood of my own near and dear ones? So everything was centered around I and Mind. His thoughts were centered around I and Mind. Then eventually at the end of first chapter Krishna arjuna tells Krishna his situation and then says my mind is reeling, I am unable to stand the bow. Gandhiwa is slipping from my hand. And then he eventually sits down, gives up his bow and says krishna, I will not fight. So after hearing all the words from Arjuna, krishna tells how come these impurities have come upon you impurities in your thinking, impurities in your perception. As Einstein said the challenges we face cannot be solved by being at the same level of thinking we were when we created those problems. So eventually it boils down to thinking our minds, the thoughts we produce. Now after hearing Arjuna, krishna did not change the circumstances. Krishna did not tell Arjuna okay, I'll fight the battle for you. You relax, you take it easy. In fact, he inspired him to go ahead and do the same thing which was cause of anxiety for Arjuna. What he did was through the sublime instructions he changed Arjuna's thinking arjuna's perception what he thought about, what he is about to engage in what he thought about the battle in which he is about to be part of and by changing his thinking, his perspective changes. And then Arjuna stood up, fought valiantly and won the battle. So likewise, when we read Bhagavad Gita daily, it impacts our thinking. Whatever the situation we may be in, whatever challenges we may encounter, whatever problems we may face, we say Gita has solution to all problems, may not have solution directly per se. To financial problems per se. It may not have know having lot of challenges in family. Husband and wife not getting along. Yes, the solution is there in the Gita because Gita takes our thinking not just to being positive in fact it transcends goes much much more than positive because it helps us purify our thoughts, makes our thoughts divine, makes our thought our thinking Godly. It's one stage even higher than being positive. So that's what Gita Mahatmya is saying that one's next life will be spiritual if one reads Bhagavad Gita this is Mahatma number two. Verse number two Gita Mahatma if one reads Bhagavad Gita very sincerely and seriously many times we read it very mechanically as a matter of duty. If one reads Bhagavad Gita very sincerely and seriously, then by the grace of the Lord the reactions of his past misdeeds we suffer because of our past misdeeds, good or bad, if we are enjoying life yes, it's a reaction of the good deeds we have done in the past, in this life or in our previous lives. Likewise for the miseries we encounter again. Tatyanukampam susumikshamana bunjana EVAT makritambipakam it's my doing. The reactions of his past misdeeds will not act upon him. The example is given. Just like you might have seeds. But if you fry them in a frying pan, if you roast them, even those seeds may be good, but they lose the potency or power to germinate. After the seeds are roasted or you have fried them, you put them in a soil, give all the required conditions. The moisture manure make all of the conditions conducive for the seed to grow, but it will not grow. So likewise here in the Mahatma it says if one sincerely reads Bhagavad Gita with seriousness then the reactions of his past misdeed many of the deeds we have done, we may not be even conscious of. We might have done unintentionally, but still the reactions are there. So here it says, reactions of such past misdeeds will not act upon a person who reads gita daily sincerely and seriously. So if we are equipped with this knowledge of gita and we are reading gita daily, it acts like in fact, it's wrong to compare to antivirus because we don't generally think very highly of antivirus these days. A lot of people say this antivirus which are there in the market, the same company, is probably producing viruses and then they are marketing the software. It's a marketing gimmick. But this bhagavad gita can protect us from all these crazy thoughts which can run through our minds, which can eventually derail our attitude. So once there was a captain. He just retired. He was in a shipping company and used to stay in a Maldives Island and he would skipper boat between two islands. The tourists would come and sometimes there could be some regular people also wanting to travel between the two islands. So he would skipper a boat between the two islands, having got an experience of being a captain in a ship. And one day in that particular boat, there were a group of young students. And when they were about to start, the captain kneeled, hands folded and offered some prayers. And invariably, sometimes the younger generations, they don't understand why people go to temples. Sometimes they are not God fearing or they don't believe in God. At times people are having an atheistic temperament. So one of them laughed and said, why waste time? After all, today it's a good day and the ship is and the sea is very calm. What's the use of offering prayers? But it was part of the ritual, part of whenever he would be about to take off or sail, he would kneel down and offer prayers. On that particular day, unfortunately, suddenly the storm blew and from nowhere there was lot of turbulence, a lot of waves in the water, and even the whole boat started rocking violently because of that storm. And everyone on that particular day started panicking, anxiety, screaming. And then few of them got together and says, let's pray. Let's pray. Somehow, by Lord's blessings, only today we can be saved. And they even came to the captain and said, why don't you join in offering prayers with us? Obviously they did not say the way I am saying. I'm sure they must be quite panicky and says, please do something and then ask the captain to join in offering prayers. So the captain said, when the sea is calm, I offer my prayers. When the sea is rough, I attend to my boat. In other words, he was saying that when the sea is calm, in other words, in good times, when we are not completely overwhelmed with challenges, when we are equipping ourselves, bathing in the genesis water, the water of the Gita. Then when we come through storms or rough times, then we'll be able to easily sail through because of that knowledge, because of that understanding, because of that faith. I'm sure each one of you have heard this wonderful saying if you pray to God only when you have problems, that's what most of the people do. If you pray to God only if only when you have problems, then you have a problem. Many times people go to God, offer prayers. We have got many requests during this pandemic. Somebody near and dear one is admitted in the hospital. Swamiji, can you please pray? So people do approach God. Many are God fearing in that sense. They believe in God. But praying to God, remembering Lord, reading Gita is not part of their daily schedule. Only when the sea is rough, when they face challenges, they remember God. So if we remember God only if only when we have problem, then there is a big problem. Although the Lord is very merciful, he even reciprocates whatever little bit devotion, whatever little bit love we show. But the best thing is that if we can remember the Lord, even if we are not having challenges, even in our good times so it's very important that we equip ourselves with this knowledge, this understanding so that we have the right understanding, the right attitude when we face some upheavals in our life. So we'll now have kirtans. After the kirtans, we will have the last part, which is the most important part, where I'll share with you four important ways in which we can cultivate the attitude of gratitude. So before we get into that discussion, we'll all join together in the kirtans and then come to this third part. Hari. Krishna. Krishna. Krishna Hari Ram rai it I'm just like it's, not it. So, to recap what we have so far discussed, we talked about how a mind is a thought factory, constantly producing thoughts. And we have to have some kind of a QC in place to ensure the thoughts are the right kind of thoughts, pure thoughts which will help us to be in the right mindset and the right attitude. And we talked about, just like in a computer, we have attacks of viruses and we need an antivirus. Likewise, if on a daily basis we can bathe our intellect, our thinking can be influenced by the immortal Nectar, the message of Bhagavad Gita, then we can protect ourselves from all these kind of base thoughts which can ruin our lives. Now I'm going to share with you some practical things which we all can do in our daily lives which will help quite a bit in cultivating the attitude of gratitude. These I have personally practiced in my life and I personally feel that I have immensely benefited and I can see the change in my life. First thing, it is very important how we start our day. Many. Times we sleep late and then we get up late. Or we plan to get up a particular time the alarm rings and then we snooze and then get up late and then the whole mood is bad, right from the word go we have got up late, we are already whatever we had planned to do, we have no time for it. We rush for our bath and then eventually the whole day gets messed up. So it is very important that we start the day with early morning victory. Start the day victoriously. And we should have some morning rituals. The best part about the morning thing is that you can plan your day in case you decide to get up at a certain time and you get up, you have complete control over that time. If you decide to do something now on Sunday evening, you're not in complete control of your time here. Mind you, I'm not saying yes, we are not in complete control. Lord is the supreme controller. But transactionally, any call can come, any message can come, somebody can drop into your house, some family member can walk into your room. Whereas in morning you have complete control over the time because the world has not woken up. One of the morning rituals which we can incorporate and there could be rituals, small, small rituals, doing some exercises, doing some breathing. What I have practiced is a very, very small, simple ritual in the morning. And that is pick up a journal, a diary and jot down three things, just three things. It may take less than a minute, minute or two. It is not something which consumes lot of time. Jot down three things which you are grateful for. For example, if you get up you are writing some days it could be repetition also. But if we have started looking for things for which we have to be grateful and challenge yourself to look for more and more. Not that every day you repeat the same three things. In fact, all of us, without an exception, are blessed with so many things which we have taken for granted. Unfortunately, we are excessively focused on what is not okay. To give you an example, if you see today's news or all the media channels are talking about what is not okay, where there is vaccine shortage, where there is shortage of oxygen cylinders, which hospitals, the beds are all fully occupied, how many people are dying, what is the positivity rate? It's all about what's not okay. In fact, they say 85% of the people, even if they get infected, they get cured in three or four days. Very few, about ten to 15% of them would require some hospitalization, or they may require some oxygen support. Only some three to 4% may get into an ICU or maybe on a ventilator. But what we get to see is only those 5% or 8% people who have lost lives, people who have died. People who did not get the right kind of place to burn, bury or cremate that gets highlighted, that 85%. Or the people who are not getting infected or people who got infected and got cured in three days. You're not talking about them. So in other words, we get a picture which is not necessarily as bad as it is shown. I'm not demeaning anyone. I'm not saying that deaths are not happening. I'm not saying that media is portraying a wrong picture but it is highlighting something and downplaying something which so that the viewers get a very, very different picture of the ground reality. So likewise, in our lives there could be many, many good things happening which we have taken for granted. And there could be few things which are yes, not okay. And our mind can get completely overwhelmed with those things. Anxiety, worry. We can get into a loop thinking loop where constantly those thoughts regarding those circumstances, those people are getting generated in our minds. So simple ritual in the morning when you get up, have some diary, have some journal where you ask yourself a question what are the three things for which I can be grateful to? Srila Prabhupada to lord Sri Krishna You might come up with answers like I am grateful to Srila Prabhupada and Krishna for Bhagavad Gita. I am grateful to Srila Prabhupada and Krishna for an opportunity to associate with them by chanting their holy names. I remember we used to conduct a workshop and one of the subtopics was this attitude of gratitude. And then invariably we would give pads, paper and pen to the participants and says please jot down few things which you are grateful for. And I would ask the audience can you please share what you have written? Some people would find it difficult even to write down one or two things. Then I tell people that if you are finding it difficult, who knows, somebody may says my life is so miserable that I can't say anything is good in my life. I have problems with my family, I have problem in the job. When I go to the company, the boss shouts at me what can I be grateful for? Then I tell the participants if that is the case, still there are many things which we can be grateful for. Be grateful that you have two eyes. There is a saying I was talking about, I was cribbing about I was grumbling that I don't have Reebok shoes till I saw a person who does not have even legs. We have taken our legs for granted. We have taken our eyes for granted many things in life we have water to drink. Ask a person who has to travel 2 just to fetch a pot of water. We are sitting in our house, we open the tap and we have pure, crystal clear drinking water. We have taken for granted the air we breathe these days. Now we have to all mask up. And whenever we travel, it was a luxury. If you recollect that, we all can assemble without any fear of infection, interact with each other, meet, greet, shake hands. That was taken for granted. Now we see that was a big luxury. We don't have to sanitize. We don't have to worry about getting infected. We can meet anyone. We can greet anyone. We can hug anyone. So in our lives, it's a fact. It's a fact. No matter what our situation may be, we have hundreds of things for which we have to be grateful for. It's just a question of having the right attitude. It is not that there are successful people where their lives is completely span. No challenges, no difficulties. Sometimes we get that kind of a picture when we see some celebrities. They have accomplished. They're very successful. Big fan following. Lot of name and fame, lot of richness, lot of wealth. As if everything is so smooth in their lives. Yesterday I was hearing in some context small interview. Somebody was interviewing Priyanka Chopra. And then she said that when she first moved to New York, there was a phase. When she even consulted a therapist. She was in a completely new place, new culture, meeting new kind of people. And she went through depression. Lot of celebrities, they go through challenges with their minds in the industry in which they are operating with the kind of people they are interacting with. Lot of competition, lot of pulls and pushes. It's not that everyone's or at least what we get to understand that some celebrities life is all good. We all have challenges. It's just a question of having the attitude where we are constantly reminding ourselves, proactively, left to ourselves, our mind will drift into negative direction. We'll start getting focused on what is not okay. We proactively consciously think of what is okay, which is a fact. Just like I gave this example. In present pandemic, most of the people, 85%, even if they get infected. There's another article which says so far only 2% of the people, 2.5 crore people have got infected in India. And out of which 85% also are just three days. Two days some kind of fever comes and then it subsides. They are okay. So even if there are challenges, yes, there are good things in our life which we should proactively try to recollect and be grateful for. So in the morning, it may just take 1 minute, less than a minute. Although it may look like a very simple thing, but the effect of this small exercise is very profound. In the long run, it may not happen immediately. Because what this small exercise is doing is trying to shift our focus on what is okay. Shift our focus. And if you can bring Srila Prabhupada Lord also into the picture. Your appreciation for them, your love for them, your feeling of reciprocation, how they are helping, how they are reciprocating also can magnify. It's a fact that Srila Prabhupada and Lord are doing so many things for us. But we have all taken it for granted. So in the morning just it may take 1 minute, just write down three things what you are grateful for. It could be the Bhagavad gita. If we are not getting anything, we could write the water I drink the water to drink, the air to breathe, good health, good friends. You could be very specific a particular friend who has helped you. You can write down the name of that person. And the best part, the most important part is we try to feel. It's just not some words you feel actually feeling does not take time. You feel you're so blessed that you have an opportunity to chant the names of Lord to associate with the Lord who has come in the form of his name. Many people don't have that opportunity or even if they have the opportunity, they are not qualified. They are so unfortunate the name of the Lord will not come on their tongue. So write three things and then spend a minute or so try to feel. So that's one thing which I have personally done. Second thing is, in case we are falling short of time, we have many things to catch up with when we get up in the morning. What I have also done is tried to combine two things. So since invariably when I am in Mumbai, the room is closed because the place is quite close to a road. So nighttime, I have to close the windows. So morning, invariably I sit very close to the window and I do some bit of deep breathing. And when I take a deep breath, when I hold the breath for few seconds and the whole process of inhalation, holding and exhalation, I have a sheet in which I have jotted down so many points for which you have to be grateful for. It could be the parents, it could be the holy name. It could be wonderful place to stay, wonderful Prasadam, wonderful festival which you have participated. Nice beautiful deities you've had, Darshan. We can find so many things if we are actually looking for. So when I take a deep breath, the whole process of inhaling, holding and exhaling, during that process I just put a tick mark to one particular point. It could be, let's say Shila Prabhupada. So when I am inhaling holding the breath, I am closing the eyes and I am feeling that how grateful I am that I have a spiritual master like SHLA Prabhupada. So this is one thing. So the variation of this is instead of just jotting down, you already have jotted down few points. You feel it. And in case you don't have enough time, you can mix it with your breathing or some kind of exercises which you are doing. So that's the second thing which I do. The third thing is in the night. It's also very important with what consciousness we sleep. Just like we have to start the day victoriously. Likewise, it's very important that we also sleep with proper consciousness. So in the nighttime, again, before sleeping in your journal, ask yourself and jot down what are the three accomplishments? Or what are the three good things which has happened today? What are the three things you have achieved? What are the three things which you can feel good about? What has happened in your life now? Quite possible. Throughout the day, many wrong things have happened. People have come and criticized you. You have got something. But still, there are some accomplishments, some good things, some things which you have to be grateful for and try to write down. Like, for example, today, if I were to write down, I said today I had a wonderful Gita Life class, I could speak well. I feel that Lord has blessed me with an ability to communicate well. So be grateful for in the night also, it could be what has happened in that day. It could be very specific. I got an opportunity to speak to that person and learn so many things. I read this particular book, and in that book, this particular insight is very, very important. I heard this lecture in that lecture. This point was very, very striking. If I practice this, it can really help me transform my life. So you jot down. So over a period of time, actually, the sunflower principle starts playing a very, very important role in our life. In other words, in spite of whatever is happening, we tend to be like a sunflower where we are focused on what to be grateful for. What are the good things happening in our life? Even though there are many ups and downs in my life, after an hour or so in the description of this video, I will share with you a link. It's an audio. It's an M p three file. Please do not download now. You can check up. After an hour, we'll upload it. It'll be a link where you can download an audio. That audio is for about 15 minutes. I have downloaded this and I have customized it, made some changes. So what I have done is take a particular thing. Let's say I am grateful to the Lord for air. I am grateful to the Lord for fresh fruits and vegetables. We have all taken it for granted. So there are many such things. And after each particular word, gratitude, there is a gap of about 30 minutes, or sorry, 30 seconds. So when you hear that again, try to feel. Feel and keeping the Lord and spiritual master in the center. It's happening because of them. It's happening because of their mercy. It's because of the Lord that we have clean water to drink. It's because of the water. Today we are surviving. It's because of the Lord that we. So in other words, you can be more Krishna conscious, more God conscious if you see that. Yes. How the Lord is so thickly involved in your life and blessing you with so many things. So I'll share that audio link where you can download this audio and you can always play that audio. And if you're going for a walk or you are doing some things, you can always have it and it will always trigger that feeling of gratitude. Some words which you can start applying your mind on and it'll help you. So today I'm also going to share with you very important thing. We are going to have this Vyasapuja celebration. Vyasapuja means where we glorify the Spiritual Master. The appearance day of the Spiritual Master is also called Vyasapuja. He being the representative of Veda Vyas. So now I am in the live chat. I am going to share with you a link. In this link you can always go and upload your offering. What is an offering? An offering is something which you write glorifying the Spiritual Master and all the whatever feelings you have for the Spiritual Master. Whatever way you feel that you have been blessed by you have experienced some reciprocation, some realization. So on this day, we glorify the Spiritual Master how to write an offering. We have also uploaded another video in our channel. You could just type how to write Vyasapuja offering or how Vyasapuja offering. If you just write in the YouTube, you will get that video. It's in our HKM Mumbai channel. So you can go through that video. You have very clear directions how to write a Vyasapuja offering. We have also given some sample specimen offerings. You can go through that. You can write a small offering. And this link, what we are sharing with you in that you can go and upload the offering yourself. You don't have to send to us. You can upload the offering and it will reach to the team which is compiling all the offering and will get into the Vyasapuja book. A book which is being compiled of all the offerings written to Srila Prabhupada. And that book will be released on Vyasapuja day. That is the appearance day of Srila Prabhupada. So you can use this link to upload the offering. And it's very important that we express our gratitude to Srila Prabhupada. Because of Him, today we have this wonderful knowledge. Because of Him, today we are blessed with an opportunity to chant the names of the Lord. Because of Him, today we are able to understand the sublime knowledge which Krishna says is very confidential. So we express our gratitude. We shouldn't take it for granted. So, these are the few things which I wanted to share. Now we'll take up some questions. This question is from Virendra Ekbote while chanting Holy names, why I don't get the feelings bhava that I belong to Krishna and Krishna belongs to me. How to perform such mindful and thoughtless chanting. If we genuinely have to do a chanting which is full of feelings for the Lord, feelings for the Holy Name to some extent, it will take time, because we have to get the knowledge about the Lord, how great he is, how wonderful he is, how mercifully he has descended in the form of his name. So if we read Bhagavad Gita, if we read Srila Prabhupada books regularly that will also go a long way. Even if those books are nothing to do with about chanting. It may be Bhagavad Gita. It may be some other books of Srila Prabhupada that will help us crystallize our faith in the Lord. Crystallize our understanding that the Lord has come in the form of name and it will go a long way in improving the quality of chanting. To be very specific if you are very specific how I can improve my quality of chanting there are many videos which are uploaded Soulful Japa by Madhu Pandit Prabhu. Find some time to go through them and I'm sure they will help quite a bit in improving the quality. Chanting this question is from Rajeshwari Rashmi Kalra. My daughter is not Krishna conscious, although I have been trying giving her Krishna prasadam every day. But I don't see any change. At times, it's becoming very difficult to live with a non devotee. We have. We all are placed in different circumstances. Yes, the circumstances may be very trying. We try the best we can do in those circumstances and rest. Leave it to Lord although it is easy to speak but what else can we do? We do the best we can. As a matter of duty, we can. Like you said, we are offering Prasadam. As a matter of duty we can request her to read a particular book or give her the right kind. Of guidance, the right instructions. And then we should also not have a guilt feeling that things should happen in a particular way. We have done our duty. That's why many, many places, Krishna and the gita says, you have the right to do your duty do not become attached to the result of your activities sometimes our expectations are very high and we are very particular about outcome it should happen in a particular way for me to be peaceful and happy it may not happen. We are not in control of everything. So we do our duty sincerely and leave it to the Lord. The outcome, whatever it is we accept it as prasadam of the Lord although yes. It may be a little challenging to like you said, it's difficult to live with a non devotee. We all are put in different circumstances because of our past Karmic reactions. We pray to the Lord, we chant the names of the Lord and wait for the Lord's mercy and circumstances can change. This question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. In material life there are different requirements and dynamics as opposed to spirituality. Though we have faith in the Lord. But how relevant is Bhakti? In modern times where everyone talks about Tech R D bhakti does not mean that Tech R D and Bhakti are not mutually exclusive. Yes, Prabhupada gave us a very very practical solution. If you feel that they are mutually exclusive also if you feel then Prabhupada gave us the sandwich program. Morning do your Bhakti then due course of time and day. If your work involves too much of R D and Tech what you talked about, do that even if you feel it has no relevance to Bhakti. And in the night again before retiring spend some quality time remembering the Lord. That's a sandwich program. But our understanding is even Tech and RND and all the things which we can do can be done with the background feeling for the Lord for the pleasure and satisfaction of the Lord. And that requires some bit of practice. That's why our society is called International Society for Krishna. Conscious. How we can be conscious of the Lord even while doing our worldly duties? Mam anus Maria Yudhyacha krishna spoke to Arjuna and the instruction was to inspire him to fight the battle now was that Bhakti? Yes was it easy for Arjuna to sit with eyes closed with no disturbance, with no distraction? Think of the Lord. He was in a battlefield. He was fighting a war, a battle. And Krishna is saying, mum anusmarya you think of me and fight. So if fighting can happen thinking of the Lord for sure, tech and R D can also happen thinking of the Lord. We need proper instructions. We need proper guidance. And if we practice it properly, we can they are not mutually exclusive. Why bhagavad gita is called Timeless wisdom. It's called timeless wisdom because it has stood the test of time. As time passes by more and more knowledge we acquire. We realize that some part of the knowledge becomes outdated. Like for example Dalton atomic theory. We thought that atoms are the smallest particle. And then there was a theory called delta atomic theory. When we came across subatomic particles then the delta atomic theory was outdated. It's no longer valid because we realize that atoms are not the smallest particle. The neutrons, protons, electrons. Likewise, Bhagavad Gita has stood the test of time with all the body of knowledge which we have gathered. At no point we can look back and see Bhagavad Gita and say that okay, now I have found out that the Bhagavad Gita, which is 5000 year old, spoken by Krishna to Arjuna in the battle of Kurukshetra. Although Bhagavad Gita is not 5000 years old, it was spoken to Arjuna again in the battle of Kurukshetra 5000 years ago. Not one word in the Gita you can point out and say now this knowledge is outdated. Now we know for sure what Krishna is saying in the Bhagavad Gita is not true. You cannot say that. You cannot point out any anomaly. And hence it is called timeless wisdom. It is not man made. This is spoken by the Lord himself. This question is from Devansh Moray. How you are? Fine and good. Doing good. What does it understood that one is reading Bhagavad Gita sincerely and seriously? Sincerely and seriously means attentively trying our best to ensure that sometimes we can sit in the bed and like a novel we can glance through just like we read some magazines. Unlike that, since Bhagavad Gita is scripture, it is good that we sit properly attentively try our best to read. And that's what I meant by reading sincerely and seriously. This question is from Lahari Prabhuji. Which level of anger is good for a person blaspheming devotees? Scriptures? Yes, there is something called as rightful anger. We have example of Hanuman getting angry. We also have example of Lord Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu getting angry at two drunken brothers Jagai and Madhai. So a scripture says that when the Lord is being blasphemed or the devotees are being blasphemed, the deities are being blasphemed, scriptures are being blasphemed. It is okay, not okay. In fact one should get angry at such people. Or it is said that if we cannot, if we are not bold enough, we should leave that place. So there are some references where it is important that we get angry. Scriptures are not asking us to be like a stone inert without any feelings, without any emotion. Every emotion has a place, a right place. And that's what we should learn. This question is from Debakar Patnayak. Why being grateful always create an impression of inferiority in the eyes of world? In turn creates confusion and we take uturn it is not necessary. It creates feeling of inferiority. In fact, this is something which is very internal. It will help us be in a right frame of mind. It will help us have the right perspective. As I mentioned, it's a fact. It's a fact that I am grateful for so many things which the Lord has blessed me. I have taken it for granted. So there is nothing wrong about feeling that. In fact it will be very empowering. One will feel that one is so blessed. So it is not true that a person will get into a feeling of inferiority. Can you please brief the quality control techniques of our thought? In fact, the entire session was about how we can convert our thoughts where we become overly focused on what is not okay to what is okay in our lives. Thereby it helps us purify our thoughts and ensure that we are thinking positively. We are always focused on what is going okay in our life. In fact, we cannot turn blind eye to what is not okay. But many times we brood, we become angry. We are full of worry, we are full of anxiety because we are overly focused on what is not okay. That is what we should avoid. This question is from Krishna Chaitanya how to overcome a thought that God will punish us if we don't bow down whenever we see the Lord krishna or Demigod how to overcome negative thoughts in mind blaspheming any demigod or others? The first part is how to overcome a thought that God will punish us we should not have. In fact, sometimes we use the word we should be fearful of God. Actually, it's not the right word. We should not be fearful of the Lord. The Lord is loving. He is not a person out there to punish us for every small transgression or mistake we do. In fact, he's our loving father. So we should try our best to obey his instructions and not be overly worried about we will be punished. We should not be fearful of Him. No child is fearful. It's not natural for a child to be fearful of his other.