Hare Krishna. A warm welcome to all of you for today's Gita live session. The topic for the day is the missing point. Many times we might wonder what is missing? Why, in spite of our efforts individually and collectively to be happy, to experience satisfaction, contentment, still it remains elusive. It's missing and we can see it. It's quite obvious if you see the world around us. So what's the missing point? We'll cover this in today's session based on Krishna's teachings in the Gita. Before we start request all of you to kindly join me. We will offer these prayers. These prayers are displayed on the screen. You can kindly also chant them along with me. And then we will plunge into the discussion. Nama om Vishnupadaya Krishna prashtaya Bhutale shimate bhakti vedanta Swaminitinamine namaste saraswati devi gauravani pracharina nirvishes j shi krishna chaitanya prabhu nityananda shi advaitagadhara Shivasadi gaurabhakta Vrinda namomah Krishna primapradayati Krishna Krishna chaitanya namratvishe Namah. Namo brahman go. Brahmani hitayacha. Jagadhitaya Krishna go Vindaya namo. Namah he Krishna Karuna sindhu Dinabandhu Jagatpate Go Pesha Gopika Kanta Radha kanta Namastute taptagan chango Rangi Radhe Vrindavaneshwari Rishabhanu sute Devi Pranami haripri Bancha Kalpatarubhyascha ripasindhubhya Vaja Patitanam Pavnabhyo Vaishnavyo Namonamah hari Krishna hari Krishna krishna Krishna hari hari hari Rama hari Rama ram Rama hari Hare so today in the discussion on the missing point, we'll be broadly covering three important aspects. Each will have a title and like we have done in our previous sessions as we move forward, I would request all of you to kindly mention it in the live chat after we have covered each point. The first point is they do not know. I repeat they do not know. Now one might wonder who is they and what they do not know. So in the Bhagavatam it is said natuhu vidhu means to know nate, Vidhu, SWAT, Gatimhi, Vishnu they do not know. They means the entire populace, by and large majority of the people in this world. Nathidu vidhu means to know Swarth gatimhi Vishnu. The real Swartha. The real self interest is Vishnu. They do not know. It's quite interesting to observe that each one of us each one of us, without an exception we all have different professions, different backgrounds, born in different circumstances, different goals, different aspirations. Each one of us are unique. But still there is one thing in common and that is all of us, without an exception. Rich man, poor man, Indian, American, educated, uneducated every one of us, without an exception. We are pursuing happiness. We are wanting to be happy. If we are already happy, we want to increase it. And if we are not happy, we are wanting to be happy. If we are miserable, we are trying to get out of that miserable condition so that we can be happy. And as I mentioned, it's not wrong to pursue happiness because that's the quality of a soul. Anandamayo Vhyasat to be happy, to be happy, to be joyful is not a sin a soul seeks ananda. But in spite of our desire, our inclination, our aspiration to be happy and to maximize our happiness and in spite of we putting lot of efforts, people are working very hard. People are not lazy to pursue happiness. There was a time when life was quite relaxed. People would work for seven to 8 hours in their offices, in their workplace. I have seen that particular life living in a township where people would come back from their workplace at 06:00 in the evening, 630. And then those were the days when you didn't have internet, you didn't have cable television and all that. So people would invariably have that early dinner by 8830. And you will see people strolling, having a night walk, socializing, talking to each other, some people engaging in some sports. But we don't see that everyone is busy and we are working very hard. Gone are the days where a person works 6 hours, 7 hours, 8 hours. These days, 10 hours, 9 hours, 12 hours is very common. We see people working even 14 hours a day, all for happiness. Now, here there is a contradiction. We are seeking happiness, we are pursuing happiness. We are working very hard for it. Everyone world over. The scientists, the architects, the builders, the engineers, the doctors, everyone is working very hard so that we can be happy. This world can be a wonderful place for us to all live. But statistics, the numbers prove otherwise. If you see statistics, numbers in terms of the diseases, if you see in terms of hypertension, blood pressure, anxiety, depression, suicides, abortions, the numbers speak a different story. On one side we want to be happy, but other side, what we are getting in spite of we working very very hard, very strenuously to achieve that happiness. What we are getting in return is something different. We are more and more unhappy. If we could somehow although we don't have very easy way to measure happiness, if we could somehow quantify and measure just like you can measure temperature, it's very objective, 98.7, 101.2, you can measure very objectively. If we were to have some measuring scale to measure happiness, and if we were to measure happiness, an average person is enjoying or other is experiencing today in this world an average person in this world what he's experiencing if we could somehow measure some of you may agree with me that man 25 years back. Minus internet, minus all the gadgets, minus all the modern means of transportation and communications, all the mobile phones, facebook, social media, all what we are made for our happiness, communication, transportation, all that man 25 years minus all this maybe was quite happier. Much more happier. Some of you may agree with this what I am saying. So this brings us to a very fundamental question. What is the missing point? Where are we going wrong in our pursuit of happiness? Intent is not wrong to be happy is not wrong to work hard. We are doing that. We are not lazy, we are not laid back. But in spite of working very hard and pursuing happiness, why is it that we are getting something which is different from what we are pursuing? Very different from the goal what we have set? That I want to be happy. And that's a common goal. The details may vary. Somebody might want to be happy by becoming an architect. Somebody might want to be happy by being a chartered accountant. Somebody might want to be happy to apply for a visa and go and settle down in some developed country, be in US, in Europe, some other country. Retails may vary but then the end objective is the same. So what is the missing point? So Bhagavatam is saying nath Vidhu they do not know Swartha gaTim. Their real self interest is Vishnu. They should be pursuing Vishnu. The satisfaction of Vishnu, they do not know. So one time there were three friends. They were staying on the 30th floor of a building, tall building. And they were sharing a house, an apartment, the 30th floor of the building. So one day after office hours, they came back home and they reached the ground floor. All of them came back together, probably working in the same office. And they saw a notice apologize for inconvenience cost. The lift is under emergency repair. So lyft was not functioning. They are staying on the 30th floor and they have come back from the office completely tired and exhausted. And there they have this notice inconvenience regretted. What can they do? It's an emergency repair. So these friends, they thought now we have no option but to take the stairs, reach the 30th floor and we have no option. So they all talked to each other and said okay, while we climb the stairs, let's engage ourselves. Rather than engaging in some meaningless discussion let's recall some anecdote, some story. And just for a change, let it be something which is tragic. Let us recall something which has which we have heard of, some story, some anecdote which is tragic. And let's have a competition. After we reach our home, our apartment on the 30th floor we will decide whose story will take turns. Each one will have to tell a story an anecdote which is tragic. And we will decide whose story or anecdote was the most tragic. Let's have this competition and I'm sure the time will pass very quickly. So they all started off. The first one began and he said the first time when I heard this story there were tears in my eyes. It's so tragic, so unfortunate. And then he started off I know a lady, she had seven miscarriages. She wanted to have a child. She and husband planned. And unfortunately every time, be it third month or 8th month or 6th month, every time for seven times they had miscarriages. They were in anxiety they went to many doctors, they consulted many physicians, they took various medications in a desperate need to have a child. And eventually, by Lord's Grace 8th attempt, they begot a child. And because they had gone through so much of pain, so much of difficulty, so much of anxiety, they were very, very attached to this child. They loved him so much. They pampered him with everything he wanted right from the day he was born. And by the time this time, as of today, as of present, he was seven years old. So whenever he would go home, go outside for playing or whatever it is, the mother would anxiously wait. She was so attached, the only child they had. And one day, while this child had gone in the neighborhood with a small bicycle, small bicycle to play and move around with the friends while he was returning back, and then he stopped and he said, it's so tragic. It's so tragic. He says, while he was returning back, a car hit him from back and he was spot dead. He was spot dead. And when this I can't explain to you. When the mother, the parents heard about this, what they went through, what they went through, their whole life collapsed. They were shattered, they were broken hearted. I don't think there could be anything more tragic than this for a mother who has tried to beget a child, had a miscarriage seven times, eventually got it. The only child, and it died untimely because of freak accident. By the time they had reached the 10th floor and then the second one started he says, yes, what you have told is quite tragic. But what I'm going to share with you is even more tragic. When I heard this story, it took me days to reconcile, to settle down with the shock, with the grief which I experienced on hearing this real life story. And then he went on to explain that there was a family, and this was in one sense a role model. This family generally in families, there's always a TIFF, the undercurrents, misgivings, fights. But here it was quite unique. The husband and wife, they were quite loving, caring, never ever they had fought in their life. And the children, very good upbringing, very brilliant, excellent in academics. And one fine day, this whole family had gone on a vacation and they were returning back and they had a nice time, the entire family, they were in a car. And unfortunately, on that day, the line man generally in the railway signals, wherever the road crosses the tracks, you have a line man who closes this thing. He unfortunately was drunk that day. Somehow he missed putting the bridge, whatever is called, to stop the people to move and cross the track. He forgot that. And this did no mistake. They were just returning back, normal speed, following all the regulations. They suddenly crossed the track. And by that time the engine and the train came by and they were completely smashed, including the car. The entire family collapsed and died on spot. The whole bodies were completely ramped. So it was very tragic. By the time a couple of them had started crying, he says, Very unfortunate. And by the time they had almost reached the 25th, 26th floor and then the turn was for the last one to share his story and then he was quite reluctant, quite should he share the story is going to be very tragic. It'll shatter all of them, including the friends who were there. They'll experience a shock of their life. So he was reluctant and they kept climbing. So others said, no, share whatever it is. He says, I've heard both of your stories, but I think the one I am going to speak is very tragic. So they all said, Why don't you speak? And he was reluctant somehow to share this. He says, Somehow I don't have the courage to share this with you. I'm sure you all will be so shocked. So much dejected hearing this. And they kept encouraging and by the time they had almost reached the 29th floor, they kept climbing and they reached the 29th floor. And then he says, Actually, my story is very small, it's a one line story. And then he said, I'm sorry to say it's very difficult for you to take it in stride. I have forgotten the key to our apartment downstairs. And by the time these two friends, they were completely ready to hit him, they have spent all the time climbing the stairs. By the time they reach their apartment, 30th floor, with great difficulty, climbing the stairs one by one and this person is saying that he has forgotten the key. It should not happen that we also do the same mistake. And if we are in the same predicament nate vidhu swarth gaTim hi vishnu they do not know, then we will also experience the same thing. Nata vidhu swarth GATIMI vishnu. The point when we leave this body, leave this world, we will experience that pain. All what we have painstakingly worked on, acquired, achieved degrees, bank balance, money, properties, assets, everything will be left behind. We have heard it many times. We also say it Chalika le kayangay. But we will experience that it will be just like sometimes a dope test. Recently a boxer from India was failed a dope test. Or sometimes, when such things happen, they're stripped of their medals. It's painful experience. Lance Armstrong, he was the cycling champion for eight years. I don't know, it's a very rigorous race for cycling competition. And he was found doping, taking drugs and he was stripped of all his medals. So all the achievements will be stripped off and we will feel a sense of dejection that whatever I have worked for, whatever I've achieved has no meaning. I have to just leave behind everything and just go empty handed. So what is that main thing which if we don't have it's all worthless, it's all meaningless. And that Bhagavatam is saying Nathidu, swarth Gatemhi, Vishnu they do not know that their real self interest is Vishnu. We'll cover more in detail. Why it is said like that, they do not know and why Vishnu is this real self interest. We'll cover more in detail. So first point, I request the devotees attending the session today to kindly jot down in the live chat what is the first point, the heading of the first point and then we move on to the second point. The second point is watering the root. I repeat, watering the root. I'm sure some of you might have watched the oh my God OMG movie quite a lot, although we don't watch movies but many people spoke to me swamiji, have you watched? Swamiji, have you watched what's the rebuttal? How do you explain what is being mentioned? Lot of things were sarcastically portrayed and many people were completely shaken unless they had good spiritual understanding. There's a family known to me, the younger son, he went to that movie, saw the movie and after that day he stopped going to the temple, stopped believing in God. He saw in movies certain things just like they're doing abhisheka and that milk going in the drain and so many other things which were very sarcastically portrayed. So he felt that it was all blind belief, superstitious. We all believe and worship statues, idols. There is no God until date. Although other family members are practicing Krishna consciousness till date he is not budging from his position and he does not want to chant, does not go to the temple, does not want to follow any spiritual or religious practice. So when I heard so much I also watched because since we conduct many sessions, it's important to know what are people watching so that we can address those doubts which might have crept in the minds of people. So I was speaking to one lady, she told me that this doubt came in my mind also and she is quite pious, quite religious. So every I think I don't remember one day in a week she would go to a Shiva temple and she would carry a pot of milk and offer that milk to that Shivling. So this lady told me that one day, instead of going to the temple and offering that milk to Shiveling, I saw a poor child on my way to the temple. And I could make out that he had not eaten, was quite lean, it was quite obvious. And he was asking for food, asking for money. So I just gave that milk to that boy. And as if he was so hungry and so thirsty, immediately took that pot and he drank that milk. And the smile, what I saw on his face was ethereal. The satisfaction I got by seeing the smile on the face of that child was so satisfying. So the question was we offer milk to Shivling, but here we see a live person and we offer that and we can see an immediate change, happiness on that face, which is very satisfying. So why should we not do that? Why should we go to the temple do abhishek? Why should we offer garland to the deity archa vigraha? After all, who knows? God's there, not there. It's a statue, it's an idol. We all just have some belief, some faith. But here it's a boy who is just there in the street, hungry. And you give that you can see the smile. It's quite clear, quite obvious that you have helped someone. And you also experience that joy, the happiness, the satisfaction of having helped someone. So then she asked me what's wrong in it? Can we not just do that? Yes, logically speaking, prima FACA at the face value, it looks quite appealing. And that's what the movie has taken advantage of. And when people do not know proper spiritual understanding of what we do, why we do, then we can get completely bewildered. So I gave her an example. Let's say there is a tree in our garden and for whatever reason, the tree is completely drying up. It's drying up? Not completely, it's drying up. And what are the symptoms? The leaves are turning yellowish, shriveled and you can make out that because of the hot, the summers, there is definitely some deprivation of water and because of which it is drying up. Now you have a water can you can see all the leaves, the twigs drying up. Where do we go and put water? I asked her do we pour water on the leaves? Seeing that the leaves are drying up, she said no. I asked her where do we put the water? She told at the root Then I said but the roots are not drying up. In fact, the whole trunk of the tree is quite nourished, it's only the leaves which are drying up. And it was quite obvious this is the right way to water a plant, a tree. You put the water on the root and automatically the water gets distributed or reaches all the twigs, branches, everything. Same is the case here. Natividu swarth gatimhe Vishnu vishnu Krishna is the root yata taro mula nisha chanayana yata taro taro means the tree mula nisha chanayana. Just like in a tree, if you pour water on the root, the water gets distributed, water reaches every part of that tree. Likewise, if we please Vishnu, if we please Krishna, if we satisfy by our works, by our actions, by our deeds, by our thoughts, then yasmin tushte jagat Tushta by satisfying him, the entire world can get satisfied. We have example of the Durvasa Muni who came to Ambarish Maharaj and with his huge number of disciples and they all went to river and they asked for food and Amaresh and where can he provide food? For so many people. And then Krishna took that morsel and everyone was satisfied. Sorry. It was the pandavas. So Nathidu swarth gatimhi Vishnu krishna or Vishnu is a root just like it looks contradictory. The leaves are drying up and you're putting water in the roots. It's apparent contradiction. But the fact is that is the right method in today's world. We were talking about the missing point. There is no shortage of humanitarian work. There is no shortage of people with good intentions trying to help others. In the recent times, because of COVID there's no shortage of contributions, donations and the relief work which has happened. In fact, when the second wave came and there was lot of this thing many countries were apparent not having good terms with India also sent planes loaded with relief materials. And India after 16 years even changed that policy and accepted those relief materials. So there is no shortage of people trying to help, trying to make this world a better place, giving donations, contributions to help others. But as I mentioned in my previous point in spite of all the good intentions, in spite of all the good work, the numbers speak otherwise more and more people are going below the poverty line. More and more people are losing their jobs. This pandemic has really shaken up the whole world. If we have some spiritual orientation, definitely we will understand that we have missed a very very important point. We have, in our pursuit of happiness have gone wrong, miserably. It should make us think what is that missing point? And that is what the Bhagavatam is saying. Once there was a villager who had a dog and this village happened to be next to a highway. And in the evening, after the sun sets down, the weather becomes quite cool. He would sit just outside his house and the dog also would sit by the side of a roadside. And every time a vehicle would pass, the dog would also start running along with the vehicle, trying to overtake the vehicle. But dog has limitation. The vehicles run at a huge speed 70 80 on a highway. So every time the vehicle would come and the dog would start running, it would run for a while along with that vehicle with the intent to overtake that vehicle. But every time the dog would be left behind, the vehicle would continue. So once this villager, the person who was owning this dog, his friend asked him I am amazed at the dog's perseverance. Do you really think that a day will come when he will overtake a vehicle, a speedy vehicle, speeding vehicle, passing on a highway, 80 that speed? Do you think a day will come when he will really overtake that vehicle? So the villager replied, that does not worry me. When will he overtake? Will that day come? What worries me is what will he do after he overtakes a vehicle? In other words, it is futile. It is waste of time. It's waste of energy. After all, it's a dog. We cannot blame. It does not have that intelligence to assert in, to discern, to discriminate. But we are human beings. We have got intelligence. We are engaged in many pursuits, trying to achieve many goals which are like the dog trying to overtake that vehicle. Missing the main point. And what is that main point? Natevidu Swarth, Gatimhe, Vishnu so I request the devotees to kindly mention the second point, the heading in the live chat. As we move on to the kirtan, we'll participate. We'll all join together and participate in the kirtan. And after kirtan, we come to the third point. And then we take on some more questions and answers. Questions. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari. Ram. Hari. Ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari. Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Ram. Harsh. NA krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Krishna krishna. Hari. Ram. Ram. Ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Ram. Ram. Ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari krishna Hari. Hari. Ram. Hari. Ram. Ram. Ram. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari Krishna. Ram. Ram. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Ram. Ram. Ram. So quick recap of what we have covered so far. The .1 was they do not know. Natividu Swarth, gaTim, Hivishno the second point was watering the root. If we have to water a plant, although the leaves are drying, we actually put water on the root with the understanding, with the knowledge that the water will get distributed everywhere. And that's the right way of watering a plant. In fact, if we keep watering the leaves, all the more the water will get. The plant will get dried up because you're missing the main point. So the third point today, what we're going to discuss is please make a note of it. Value of human life. I repeat, value of human life. We all know human life is very valuable. Out of 84 lakh species of life chorasi, Lak, Yonia after many, many life transmigrating in lower species we get the human birth. Labdhwa Sudulabam, Idam, Bahu Sambhavante after many, many lives after many, many births we get this human birth. And this human birth is very precious. Why it is precious in this birth? In human form of life, we can find out the missing point in no other life form plants, birds, aquatics, reptiles, animals cannot find out. Natividu, Swarth, Gatimhi, Vishnu they cannot find out who we are, why we have taken birth, they cannot find out. So the human life is said to be very valid. That's why it's Asatoma Satgamaya come to light, come to knowledge. Tamasima jotir, gamaya jotir or Asatoma sadhgamaya. The sat refers to the missing point. What we are talking about today. Ram. Nam satehe. Ram nam satehe. We see that. We hear that. So in human form of life we can understand this thing. And it's very valuable. It is said in the Bhagavatam Ladwa, Sudumbahu, Sambhavante, Manushyam, Janma Anityam although it is not nitya, it is not permanent arthadam means it is very meaningful, very precious. Only if we know the value, then we will try to make the most of this human birth. But we do not know the value. Tunam yatea napate anyone who knows the value, the Bhagavatam, the sages, tunam yatea because they know the value, they know the missing point. Turdnam yate and apate anumritu yavan before we again fall into the clutches of death and lose this precious human form. Turdnam yate tudna means there is an urgency. Tudna means quickly tunam yatea yatea means endeavor Turnam yatea napate pathet means again we fall into the clutches of death which is inevitable. Again we will fall into the clutches of death. Devotee, nondivote materialist, atheist, feast, rich man, poor man, black, white, anybody we will fall into the clutches of death and all the more we can see in present times. Tunam yate and apate anumritu yavan nishreyasa vishaya kalu sarvatrath this vishya kalu this gratification of senses, the sense pleasure sarvatrasyat in all life forms, in all other species we have abundantly experienced that. In fact, if we see material pleasure whole movies are based on attraction between male and female. And they having material sensual pleasure in gorgeous ways. We sat even the dogs enjoying that in the street. The setting may be different. They may not be in a cozy apartment but then the act which gives a pleasure, the pleasing sensation is the same. Bhagavatam is saying before we again fall into the clutches of death we have a very important responsibility, duty having got this human birth. So that's why the point, the value of the human birth. Once there was a guru who had a disciple and the disciple put forth a very important question to the guru that everyone knows that human life is precious. Everyone knows that one day we have to leave this world. Then why don't people understand the value? And why don't they take up spirituality sincerely, seriously? So the guru replied probably they do not understand the value because they don't have the knowledge. So the student was not quite satisfied with the answer. He could not comprehend what the guru said because they do not have the right knowledge. Because based on knowledge you value things. So just to give him a firsthand experience of what he told the guru gave him a stone and told in those days it was a barter system where you exchange goods. If you want something, you give something and in return you are given something back. So the guru told him you go to different, go to a marketplace, you try to barter, try to give this stone and try to get something in return. And let us see how much you are able to get. What do people tell you about this particular stone? So first he went to a sweet shop, the owner of the shop and he told him that can I get. That sweet. Here, I have a stone. You can take this. And in return, can you give me of those sweets? So the shop owner mocked at him. He says, Get lost, go away. Don't waste my time. After all. How can I? Although he did not verbalize, he did not speak, but it was quite obvious from his action, his words. How can a stone be exchanged for sweets? They are quite costly. They have much more value compared to an ordinary stone. A stone. So he was quite dejected with that answer. He was sent back and no way he could exchange that stone with the sweets. So he went to the next place he went was actually a vegetable vendor. And vegetable vendors, they have that taraju, they have that weighing scale, those times earlier times barter system. And they have the weighing scales with they were not digital scales. They were weighing scales. We actually have the weights and we have seen people used to weigh with some stones. So they somehow have a stone which actually weighs 750 grams or 1001 kg. So he thought probably this stone might be useful as a weight to measure, but it's a stone. So he said, yes, I am willing to take and in return I'll give you this onion. He took this onion and he said, you give me this stone and I'll give this onion. So in other words, his value for that stone was equivalent to value of one onion. But this guru has said, you show this stone to many people. He did not give that stone. And he decided to go to the next shop to really find out what does that shopkeeper say? This time he went to a huge jewelry shop. And right at the entrance, the security guard first he did not allow, but since he was persistent, somehow he allowed. And the owner asked him to come in. And when he went in so the dweller, huge shop filled with gold, ornaments, jewels, different kinds of precious stones, gems. So this man showed the stone to this dweller and the dweller's eyes popped out. He saw the stone. He says, My God. And then he folded his hand and he said, Where did you get it from? And then he said, Unfortunately, I cannot afford it. I cannot afford it. If I were to give everything what I have in my shop, it won't be this thing. But can I give you some small necklace made of gold just so that I can have a closer look of this stone? Never ever I have in my life come across this precious stone. So he was amazed. So this stone was not an ordinary stone. But for a vegetable vendor who has no idea of a precious stone, it was like an ordinary stone. And he wanted to exchange with an onion. And for a sweet shop owner who again thought it's an ordinary stone, based on his knowledge, based on his perception based on his understanding. For him, it was not worth trading with any sweets in his shop. The dweller who knew about precious stone he could immediately recognize it is precious stone and was amazed how did you get it? From where did you get it? And he says I don't mind giving you some jewelry just to have a glance at this stone, a closer glance at this row. So the stone is the same. The same stone was shown to a dweller, same stone was shown to a vegetable vendor same stone was shown to the sweet shop owner. But their response was difference based on their understanding, their knowledge, their perception. Likewise, we have one perception of one understanding of what we should be doing in this human birth. And just like Bhagavatam is saying our goal is sense gratification. Big or small, rich or poor, our goal is sense gratification. What is sense gratification? We hear this quite often in Prabhupada's lectures, in Prabhupada's talks, in Prabhupada's books. What is sense gratification? When we touch the sense object? When the senses come in contact with the sense objects? For eyes, it is a beautiful form for ears, it's melodious sounds. For tongue, it is palatable food stuff, tasty food stuff which is very palatable for our taste buds, for the nose smell, these are sense objects and the senses are there. So when the senses come in contact with the sense object there is an experience of pleasure, happiness. And in today's world, the goal for everyone without an exception is sense gratification. To maximize that happiness which Bhagavatam is saying we have done that many many lives in other life forms also and it's abundantly available there. To bridge this missing point, to understand Nathidu Swartha Gatima vishnu is only possible in human birth. Sense gratification is possible in all births. Eating, sleeping, mating, defending in all births it's possible and we are doing it maybe not in a sophisticated way. Sexual enjoyment is experienced in other births also. In other forms also. That's why Bhagavatam is saying vishya kalu sarvatrasa vishya Kalu sense gratification is rampantly available in all life forms. But to understand the missing point and to just to do justice to it Asatoma satgamaya it's only possible in human birth. And Bhagavatam Bhagavad Gita, the great Acharyas who are in knowledge they understand the value of human birth. And then there is a sense of eagerness tudnam yatea before we again fall into the clutches of death very very enthusiastically without wasting a moment, we should pursue that goal. And what is that goal? To satisfy Vishnu. To please Vishnu. To be conscious of Vishnu. To be conscious of Krishna. By the way, when we are saying Vishnu Krishna some people may wonder I am interchangeably using this word. Actually Vishnu Krishna are the same personality. We will cover that in detail in some other session. Just like a High Court judge in High Court is respected with awe reverence. But the same high court judge when he comes back home, when he plays with his grandchild he has no sense that he is to be respected like that out of his intimacy, out of his love for his grandfather. So with this we will request all the devotees. If you have while we take some questions, you can jot all the three points. So that we have while we are covering the question answer, write all the three points which we have covered. The first one being they do not know. And let us see if we can get all three up there. So we have some questions today. We will just this question is from Ravi Kiran Yana Madalla. There's a movie by name Radhe got recently released. Everyone who is calling the movie name will get some Sukruti like devotees chanting Radha name. Yes, I've heard this recently. The movie Radhe I do not know the content whether it has some spiritual content. But nevertheless the name Radhe is spiritual. So yes, there is some concept called agnath Sukruti. When we chant the names of the Lord or the devotees'name even unknowingly unintentionally there is some agnath Sukruti. Unintentionally unknowingly. Just like Ajamila chanted the name Narayana, his son's name Narayana. But still he was benefited. Yes, there will be some benefit for everyone who chants the name of Radha. Although they may not be referring to Radharani, maybe referring to the moon but some sukriti, some agnath sukriti they will get. This question is from Virendra Egbote. What is the difference between material and spiritual happiness and how a person achieves spiritual happiness? I thought that answer was given by someone in the live chat. The difference being that material happiness which is like sense gratification it is quite pleasing in the beginning. It is nectar in the beginning. But Krishna says that very happiness will be the cause of misery or distress will be the cause of entanglement, will be the cause of bondage. We gratify the senses. We want to be happy. We miss the point and we become miserable because we have missed the point. Human life is not meant for yes, for our sustenance some bit of sense gratification cannot be avoided. We have to eat. We are not saying that we should eat everything which is not palatable. All tasty things should be shunned, should be renounced. Only tasteless bland food should be done. That's not the philosophy. That's not the understanding. But goal of life should not be to increase maximize sense gratification. So that's material and spiritual happiness is the opposite. It is apparently poison in the beginning. Although it is not poison, it is nectar. Chanting of the names of Krishna is nectarian reading Bhagavad gita Bhagavatam is full of rasa, full of nectar. But in present state Prabhupada compares a present state to a Jaundice patient. A jaundice patient. Even if you give a sugar candy, it will taste bitter. It's not the problem with the sugar candy the Jaundice patient is in a diseased condition. So because we are in a diseased condition, spiritual happiness is like poison in the beginning like a Jaundice patient, sugar candy is bitter but as the disease gets cured, the same sugar candy will appear sweet. So spiritual happiness, apparently. That's why I'm using the word apparently. It looks like it is poison in the beginning, it's nectar in the end. Because spiritual life means austerities, penances. Getting up early in the morning, controlling your senses, controlling the mind, restraining yourself from temptations, from allurements. It's poison for a practitioner who still has desires for sense. Gratification vishaya vini vatanta. To restrain it's difficult. But it is nectar in the end. This question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. What's correct understanding when Krishna says he will dissolve all past Karma for one who comes in his shelter? Is it so easy to get rid of bad Karmas when we know the law of Karma is so stringent? Yes, krishna is all powerful. There is no Karmic reaction which Krishna cannot so to say, cleanse clear of he is all powerful. But as we become devotees sometimes krishna allows the Karmic reactions to teach us some very important lessons. Sometimes what misery can teach us, we will not learn. We'll never learn when we are in a happy state of affairs. So for a devotee although yes when we surrender to the Lord first and foremost we are not fully surrendered to the Lord yeathamam prapadhyante as we surrender, so shall I reciprocate it is not that just because I have become a devotee I'm putting tilak I am fully surrendered? No still we may have material desires we are not pure devotees. So if we are pure devotees yes krishna takes complete charge and wipes all the Karma after that, whatever happens in that life of that is the leela of the Lord but that's not our case. We are not fully surrendered, we are not full devotees. We still have material desires, we still have independent attitude. But nevertheless, for whatever we have done on the devotional path krishna does take charge of our lives. And some bit of karma Krishna allows to manifest in our lives some miseries, some prosperity, some happiness. Karma can hit us because Krishna wants us to learn some things which otherwise we refuse to learn. This question is from Devashesh Mukherjee I have been suffering from arthritis problem in knees and waist and also joint pain. I do understand that it is due to my Prarap Karma. I want to get rid of this. In what way can I come out? Krishna? In many places in the Bhagavad Gita says you have the right to do your duty but do not be attached to the result. Many times we can go to two extremes. One is knowing that it is my Karma we don't do our duty, may not even consult a doctor, may not take the medication say it's my karma. What can I do? So that's one extreme. The other extreme is come what may, it has to get cured. Come what may, it has to get cured. That's other extreme, both extremes will lead us to problems. We do our duty as a matter of duty. Yes. Consult the best of doctors, take the best of medications, as per your discretion, as per your intelligence. And do not be attached to the results. It may happen, may not happen. There are many things in this life what we are experiencing. We may not experience relief. Somebody's leg is amputated. He may, as a matter of duty, go to the doctor, get his false artificial leg planted. But still, he cannot get this leg back. The original leg back. He has to live with it. Sometimes death happens in a family. You may long for that person to come back. But you have to live with it. There's no way you can get that person back. So, likewise, we do our duty and leave it to the Lord. Sometimes we should not even in the name of spirituality, in the name of accepting karma, we may not do our duty so that we have to take care and then leave it to the Lord. Don't be attached of the outcome. Not that we should not try, not that we should not desire. Who knows if we have good health, we can serve the Lord better. But we can do our duty and leave it to the Lord. This question is from Drishti. Swamiji. Please tell me the most important phrase of Bhagavad Gita for students. Many times when we come to spirituality, we find that doing our responsibilities, our so called worldly duties is a pain. It's not pleasing to the mind for some people. Yes, I would love to read Bhagavad Gita, chant the names of Krishna, spend all time doing that. Reading my syllabus books is a pain. And sometimes we may not even find a purpose in doing that. So, probably an answer to such students. Like you said, what's the motivation for students? Arjuna also actually in the Bhagavad Gita, the first chapter, he found no purpose in fighting the battle. He said, I'm okay with begging. As far as my sustenance is concerned, I can sustain myself begging. What's the use of fighting and killing my own brothers, kinsmen, my relatives, my near and dear ones? But Krishna said again, as a part of Dharma, he says, you think of me and fight. Do your duty. So, as students, we should not shrug from our duty? Yes, we have to. Even material education, going to school, college has a place has a place that even if we want to serve the Lord, that also this knowledge also has a place to develop our analytical skills, to develop some knowledge. Although we may not use the entire body of knowledge, but still it has a place. As students, it's our responsibility that we should study and do well in our academics. And how do we do that? Be conscious of the Lord and do your duty. Prabhupada, it may not be easy to be always conscious of the Lord. That's why Prabhupada gave the sandwich program morning find some time to remember the Lord. Chant the names of the Lord, read Bhagavad Gita, then do your duty. If you're a student, your duty is to study well. And then again the sandwich in the evening before we go to the bed, spend some time again remembering the Lord. And as we do this in course of time the upper layer and the lower layer will automatically increase. If you're doing it quite well, the Lord will bring forth those changes in life. The circumstances where we'll have more and more opportunities to remember the Lord, to serve the Lord that's what students should do. This question is from Virendra Egbote. Since Lord Krishna is everything, can we chant Krishna's holy name by meditating on various controlling elements such as air, fire, water, earth mind will not deviate while meditating on elements. There may be different kinds of meditation but the meditation what is prescribed by the Shastras in Yuga is to chant the names of Krishna, especially the Hare Krishna Mantra. I am not saying that there is a meditation like what you are mentioning here. But that may not be easy to practice and is not recommended especially for this age of Kali. This question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. If I am Krishna conscious whole my life and I am not able to remember at the uncertain last moment, is it that all our efforts have gone in vain? What is the proper understanding of Antakale maam smaran muktwa? This question was asked by a devotee to Shila Prabhupada. Shila Prabhupada what happens if a devotee has tried to remember the Lord throughout his life and the last moment, for whatever reason? Just like in a plane crash or in an accident? Just like Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated. One moment he was there and next moment there was a blast and everything was pieces. So where is an opportunity to remember? And it can happen to anyone. Sudden crash, an accident. The car is moving at 80 km, just goes off the road and hits the tree. Where is the question of remembering the Lord? So Prabhupada says if a devotee has remembered the Lord and even if even if because he has remembered the Lord throughout his life practiced remembering the Lord throughout his life. Even if he is not able to remember at the point of that the Lord remembers the devotee and all his spiritual endeavors and gives him credit for that. In other words, it is not a gamble. Yes, we should practice. Yes, we should desire that last moment. I should leave the breath remembering the Lord. But who knows for whatever reason it could be a sudden accident. Even if we fail to remember, all our endeavors will not go in vain. Just like in Bhagatam bharat Maharaj died thinking of a deer. Still he was blessed for all his spiritual activities. Next life he took the birth of in the form of a body of a deer. But he remembered his previous life experiences. Why he got this birth. And the next life the life after having got the birth of a dear, he was born as Jadabharath, most exalted devotee of the Lord. So the devotee may forget the Lord momentarily but Lord does not forget the devotees. Whatever he has done to serve the Lord to remember the Lord, the Lord does not forget that's why Nate Vidhu Swartha Gatimhe Vishnu our real Swartha is to remember the Lord. To serve the Lord to accumulate spiritual points serving the Lord which will remain with us wherever we go. This question is from Bharat Shivlani can you please explain why after chanting for so many years, I am not getting taste for it? There are ten offenses to the Holy Name of the Lord. I will not get into details. It will take some time. One of the offense is to maintain material desires. Another offense is to commit sinful activities on the strength of the Holy Name. Prabhupada gave us a story of a marriage party who wanted to cross the river and they got into the boat. And apparently the whole night the marriage party thought that the boat is moving and the boatman also, because it was quite dark, he was apparently also rowing the boat. But morning, when they got up, they found themselves at the very same spot where they were the previous night. When the boatman tried to analyze what had happened, why did not move? In spite of heroing the boat they realized that the boatman had forgotten to remove the anchor. The anchor which had tied the boat. So we might also may not have removed the anchor. Anchor of spirit of material enjoyment. We are too attached. Many times when we say chant the names of Krishna or whatever, it says no. What if I chant? I don't want to lose it also. Lose this life also. So we have to introspect the sages. Acharyas, Lord Krishna is not bluffing marketing campaigns. Yes, there is some bit of bluff. At times we are misled. But Acharyas who are pure devotees, they are not misleading us. They are saying as this holy name is full of nectar, the more we chant, the more we will want to chant, more we'll relish it. So they are not bluffing. Just that we are in diseased condition we have material desires we don't want to give up those desires we have the spirit of sense enjoyment very very deeply rooted in us should take some time for us to get cured of. And unless we are willing to give up these material desires and pursue spiritual desires sincerely, quite possible we might feel that we are stuck in one place. We are not moving ahead. This question is from Vinayak Churasia. Due to some psychological medicine I am getting 9 hours sleep and the whole routine of chanting gets disturbed. And how to get only 6 hours sleep. Please help. How to avoid mode of ignorance, you should consult your doctor who has prescribed the medication. Since you're already consulting a doctor, it is important that you give this feedback that you're getting lot of sleep and take his help. Generally when we go through some challenge, something is prescribed to us. The doctors know how at the right time to reduce the dosage. So you can please consult the doctor and please follow the advice of the doctor. This question is from Lahari Prabhuji. What is the philosophy behind ashwata tree as explained in the Bhagavad Gita 15 chapter? First two verses ashwatha tree. The banyan tree. What Krishna refers to is giving the example that just like the banyan tree on the bank of a river if you see the reflection, it's upside down. The roots are on the top, the branches, the twigs are in the bottom. So the understanding we get that this material world is the reflection of the spiritual world. Yes, in the spiritual world also there is relationships. In material world also there is a relationship in material world the relationships are based on personal sense gratification. The pure form exists in the spiritual world where all relationships are centered around Krishna. So just like in a banyan tree, you have the reflection in a water bank. Likewise this material world krishna is giving this example. This material world is the reflection of the spiritual world. In the spiritual world there are relationship, there are emotions, there are feelings. It is not void of variegatedness varieties but it is in a pure form. Right now in this material world all what is happening in the spiritual world is in a perverted form. There is relationship between man and woman there also just like Krishna the Gopis, the Gopis loving Krishna. But those relationships are pure unlike the relationships in the material world. So that's why the example of ashwata tree rabban tree is given. This question is from Arpit Pandey what is the true understanding of Yam yam Bhapi smaran Bhavam suppose at the death I'm not able to I think this is covered. I am able to think of Krishna but the Bhava of love is not there. What does here mean? Bhavam bhavam means our feelings, our emotions. I think we have covered this even if we don't have the Bhava. But if we have practiced we have tried our best to remember Krishna throughout our life. Krishna will help us give the right Bhava give the right remembrance. We do our duty. Right now we are practicing Sadhana Bhakti. Sadhana Bhakti means Bhakti which is with rules and regulations. Spiritual master has said chant 16 rounds. I may not feel, I may not have Bhava I may not experience taste but why do it? Because my spiritual master has told me to do it this question is from Ashwin Shinivasan how to persuade people to come to know about Supreme Lord when they avoid us saying no time to listen or their interest is in demigod any suggestion you have for us? Yes, people have sometimes they are quite not willing to listen. They're quite hell bent on following what they are following. They are not open minded. We should not waste too much time with such people. Fortunately, in India there is no shortage of souls. In other words, there is no shortage of people. There are always some people who are innocent and who are willing to listen. So we also do not waste time come what may. Just keep speaking to that person and waiting and somehow that person should listen. No, it may not happen. The person may not have the agnath, Sukruti or piety to understand what you are saying. He may not have that good fortune. Everyone is in a different circumstances. Somebody is in deep ignorance because of his karmic reactions. We are not powerful enough to elevate everyone. So we do as a matter of duty to that person. You give Prasadam as a matter of duty, you even preach to that person. But he is not willing to accept and it is very clear. Then do not waste time. Speak to some other person. So in other words, the problem is not with what you are speaking. The problem is with the recipient. When the rainwater falls on a rock, it will never absorb that water. It will just glide down. If the same rainwater falls on soil, it will absorb that water. If it falls in a desert, it will completely absorb that water. So there are people who are willing to listen to us. Listen to this message about Lord. Let's look for such people and speak to them. This question is from Virendra Igbote does spiritual master help a devotee at the time of death to attain spiritual world? Yes, spiritual master helps the remembrance of the Lord comes because of the mercy because of the blessing of the spiritual master we should not see that we are trying to approach Lord independently. All our spiritual endeavors should be seen in connection with the spiritual master. Because of his mercy we are able to remember the Lord. Because of his mercy we are able to chant the names of the Lord. Because of his mercy we have this divya. Gan. So we should never disconnect ourselves from the spiritual master. So if we are able to remember the Lord, it's also because of his mercy. This question is from Poonam garg insan kejitaji ram nam satya nahi bolte after death. He kubolte japki ram kanam satya phil. So that is the problem. When it says Ram nam satya, it's not after death. Actually, it is in a living state. It is the missing point. But unfortunately, because we are in Maya. We don't remember that Ram nam Satya it is not that Ram nam Satya is after death only. It is actually satya at all times. This question is from Jyoti Thakne. We get human life after a long duration. My question is in the context. If we struggle so much then our life is still full of issues, problems and struggle. Our mind is full of questions and trying to seek peace outside still be attached to parents, grandparents and all? Yes, human birth also there are four lakh species out of 84 lakh species. Four Lakh species are human birth. I recently came across a news article which says that there is a person who is so dirty in fact it's called the dirtiest person in the world. You can google and see. He has not taken bath for last 65 years. Can you believe a person have not taken a bath for 65 years? If the place where he's staying is made clean or something clean is served to him, he feels jittery about it. Just like something very dirty. We don't like it. So he feels jittery. Now he is also in a human birth out of that four lakh species. Almost like an animal. Almost like an animal. In fact, just like animals don't take bath, many of the animals don't don't this thing. So it's almost like animal. So we all are in different circumstances in that sense, we all are in different species. Even though we may be human birth Prabhupada is also a human being in that sense when he took a human birth but his consciousness is different from us exalted devotees their consciousness is different from us. So wherever we are, we accumulate our spiritual credits and move ahead. Move ahead, move ahead may not be able to complete in this life possible. We may be in a circumstances which does not permit us to. We have attachments. We have material desires we have desire to gratify our senses. It may be very deep rooted but still we progress further this question from Lata Yadav if someone who is grahastha but still feels that he is obsessed with Krishna and finds devotion enlightening then what is the way of Dharma for him or her? If a person is grahastha, has family responsibilities one should remain in the family and try to practice the principles of Krishna consciousness. It is possible. Krishna consciousness is not only for Renuncians. In fact, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu visited South India, he met a Brahmana. He gave the instructions be wherever you are, give hearing to the message Lord that will purify us and we all as I said may be in different circumstances. It may not be easy for everyone to eject out from those circumstances.