Hare Krishna. A warm welcome to all of you for today's session. The topic for the day is heaven and hell. In all scriptures we have some understanding of Swarga and Naraka, heaven and hell. So today we're going to discuss in detail, quoting from our scriptures what is the right understanding? What exactly is heaven and hell? So before we get into the discussion, let us all together pray. Seek the blessings of Srila Prabhupada, lord Chetanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Sri Krishna. So that we can have a very very fruitful, meaningful discussion and with lot of practical day to day life applications takeaways. So please join me in offering the prayers. Nama om vishnupadaya Krishna Prashtaya Bhutale Shimate bhakti vedanta Swaminitinamine namaste saraswati Devi gauravani Pracharine nirvishes jay shi krishna Chaitanya prabhu nityananda shri advaitagadhara shivasadi Gaurabhaktarinda namomah krishna premapradayat krishna krishna Chaitanya namratushe. Namah. Namo. Brahman devaya Go brahmani Hitayacha jagadhitaya krishna Go Vindaya namonamah he krishna karuna sindhu dina bandhu jagat pate Go pesha Go kakanta Radhakanta namastut taptakan Changorangi radhe vrindavaneshwari rishabhanu sute devi pranami haripri Van Chakal patarubhyascha kripasindhubha patitanam Pavna Vaishnavyo namonamah hari Krishna hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Rama. Hari Rama. Rama. Rama. Hari. Hari. So today we'll be talking about three important aspects in our discussion relating to heaven and hell. The first aspect is in all scriptures. I repeat in all scriptures, be it Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, be it Ramayan Mahabharat or for that matter Bible. Quran. In all scriptures there is mention of heaven and hell. The details may be different, the descriptions might be different but the concept is there. Like when I was studying, I studied in a convent school and we used to pray our Father in heaven, hallowed be thy name. And then in Islam Jannath, we have heard this word Jannath. It's referring to some kind of heaven. And then we have Swarga and Naraka in our scriptures. And we also have words like Vaikuntha, Goloka and lot of people get completely confused when we hear these words. For many people Golok, Vaikunta, Swarga are all one and the same. So let's properly understand what is heaven and hell. First and foremost we should understand that broadly speaking there is the spiritual world. Krishna in the Gita says Parastasma Tubhavanyo Vyakta Avyakta Sanatana there is another world which is beyond this material world which is Vyakta and Avyakta. Vyakta means it manifests. This world has come into being and one day it will get annihilated. That's why we have for creation brahma Maintenance, Vishnu and Anniliation. Lord Shiva. We talk about trinity in Hindu religion. So Vyakta Avyakta Sanatana, there is another world which is beyond this material world. And that is called the spiritual world. So Lord's, creation is this material world, this material creation. And there is another world which is ever existing eternal beyond this material world. And Sanatana, that's the spiritual world. This Swaraga and Naraka is referring to the places of enjoyment or comforts in the material world. For example, even on this planet Earth we have different countries offering different standards of living and prosperity to its citizens. For example, in America the average man enjoys a better standard of living materially speaking in terms of Social Security, in terms of comforts, in terms of amenities, infrastructure. And there are some poor countries where there is no even proper provision for drinking water. People have to walk miles for fetching water, no proper sanitation. People have to go to fields to evacuate things like that. So just like in this planet Earth we have some places which are very opulent and some places which are the standard of living is very bad. So likewise in this material world which has many many planets 14 planetary systems we talk about. So there are some planets where the standard of living is very very high. Indra loca Brahmaloka. They are called Heavenly Planets or Heavens. Just like here in this material world we have beautiful women. Men enjoy the company of women. There are apsaras, there far more beautiful celestial beauty. And the standard of enjoyment is very very high. The lifespan is very high, the comforts are very high. The standard of enjoyment is very fine. People have very fine tastes. Just like even in this world we see people who are very very opulent and rich. They have very fine taste. Taste for classical music, fine arts. They may buy a painting for 15 lakh rupees. They have very fine tastes. So likewise their standard of enjoyment is very high in some planets in this material world which is called Swaraga. And just like we have third world countries and very poverty stricken countries likewise there are some planets where the standard of living is very bad. People by and large suffer there's lot of pain, lot of misery, lot of agony. And such planets are called Naraka or Hell. As I mentioned, different scriptures may call them by different names. Nomenclature may vary, the details might vary, but the concept is the same. So what we have now understood is we have the spiritual world which is far above the material world which is called Vaikuntha Gologdham spiritual world, the Kingdom of Heaven. And we have the material world in which there is different standards of living. Some planets where the standard of living is very high is called Heaven. And some planets where there's lot of misery, it's called hell. Now who goes where? When a person is very very pious engages in lot of pious activities. Punya. Punya means opening hospitals, serving the poor and needy, opening old age homes. These are all activities which are termed as pious activities or punya. When we accumulate lot of punya then we are promoted to heavenly planets. To give an example that when we are having the right qualification we can, like Indians always aspire to go to America. If you have the visa, if you have the right qualification, if you can somehow manage to get the right kind of sponsorship or a job, you can go to US and enjoy that standard of living. And likewise, if a person engages in a lot of sinful activities which is also called papa, a person will get degraded to hellish planets after his death. So in human form of life, depending on the choices we are making, the activities we engage in, whether it is papa or punya, we get either promoted or we get demoted. We can get promoted to heavenly planets, we can get demoted to hellish planets or we can remain in this earthly planet. But one very important point which we all have to make note of. Whether we go to the heavenly planets or the Hellish planets, although we may consider it as a promotion, but still they are part of this material. World and one is not absolved of one is not freed from the miseries of Janma Mirthyu Jara Vyadhi birth, death, old age and disease. A crude example even in America we know it's a very prosperous country, but still there is death. And it is very, very obvious. Now, during COVID times we are seeing this lot of death happening in the US. Although it is prosperous comparatively, it has a very, very wonderful medical infrastructure. Everyone has insurance policies, government has Social Security. Still there's a lot of death. More than six lakh people have died. I don't know the latest numbers, but yes, it's quite huge. So even though a person may be living in Palatial bungalow with all the amenities, with all the comforts, with good infrastructure, high standard of living, still old age is there, death is there, diseases are there and finally, rebirth is there. The other day I was speaking to a devotee friend of mine who was, prior to joining the temple was working in a company, it was a US company and they had operations in India, about 600, OD people working from India. And he was explaining to me what kind of job he was doing and you won't believe it. It came out as a surprise to me. That company, which is into billions of dollars is all about the main product is where a person can go online and book what's going to happen to them after death. In other words, how the cremation has to happen. A person can choose the coffin, the person can upload the list of people who have to be invited for the final rights, can upload the list of all the people with the email IDs whom all have to be communicated after death. Because unlike India children, after 1617, once they become teenagers, they just move away. And that's been there as part of their culture for ages now. They may have some link, who knows? The parents gets divorced, the father marries someone else, mother marries someone else. So they are quite loosely knit when compared to India. So they're not even sure whether the son would be there for the final cremation. So since they have Social Security number, they have so moment a person dies, the message goes to this company. And depending on what kind of package you have taken, the entire thing is triggered. They will come with the coffin, the kind of coffin you have chosen, the body will be taken, the right kind of people will be called, they'll be invited. And all the arrangements for the final rights would be made by this company. So the point here is, even though a person may be very rich, he's still not absolved of janma mrithyu jara Vyadhi birth, Death, Old Age and Disease in the US. Just last year I was reading, there was an article which says that when there was a hurricane and a tornado, the government was quite they can have systems where they can warn the citizens well in advance. They can forecast all these things. But then once the tornado or the hurricane was coming, 36 people died. Although they evacuated a lot of people, they were asked to move to some shelter, some strong places, but still 36 people died. Sometimes we think that death happens only in third world countries or countries like India, where the infrastructure is very poor. Sometimes when especially in smaller towns or village, you call a government dispensary. And maybe if you are in need of an ambulance, who knows, you may get an answer that ambulance had gone to drop the doctor's children to school, or who knows, the wife of the doctor is using ambulance to go and purchase some vegetables. Gone to purchase some vegetables from the mandi. So we think that in a country like this, where the infrastructure is not up to the mark, we have deaths happening, we have people suffering because of old age. But that's not true. Death is there even in America. Death is there even in all prosperous countries. Old age is there, diseases are there. And again, birth is there. So therefore ashastras say Abrama Bhuvana loko punar avritino arjuna. Even if we go to Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in this material world, the heavenly planet where the lifespan is much, much higher Abrama Bhuana loko punar avartino arjuna. And once our so, when we enjoy our pious credits gets depleted just like in a bank account, we have some money basis. That money you can have a standard of living, you can buy latest gadgets, you can go and shop for the things you want. But as you are shopping, your bank balance is depleting. Every time you use a credit card, it is getting debited, every time you purchase something, it's getting debited. Likewise, when we enjoy, the currency which is getting debited from us is the Punya currency. And when we suffer, when we undertake some misery, then the papa currency is getting depleted. So that's why it is said, because of Punya we enjoy and because of papa we suffer. So Abrama bhumanaloka punar avatino. When that pious credits gets depleted, then punar avrita, we again come back to this fallen condition. We again glide back just like you have a bank balance. Again it gets depleted. Who knows it becomes nil. And if the company gives an overdraft, it can become negative also. So, therefore, knowing that papa, Punya, heaven and hell are part of this material world, even if the standard of enjoyment is very high. Because still we are caught up in this cycle of birth and death. Punarapi Janma Punarapi Marana a devotee who is in knowledge, a learned person does not make elevation of himself to a heavenly planet as his goal. Like in India. For many people, going to America is their goal, their aspiration. It's number one thing in their wish list. They think success in life is if I can somehow get a green card and get citizenship of us. So our scriptures say that even if we may get promoted to heavenly planets, they are like they are still a prison house. Still they are dukhalayamash ashwatam. It's a place of misery. And just like in a prison house you have different classes of prison because you have different types of prisoners. Sometimes you have a prison cell which is dark, damp, practically no amenities, shared bathroom. You have to sleep on a bench made of stone. So there are prisoners. Hardcore prisoners. We are made to stay in. There are prison houses where just the food is dropped from the top. It's practically like a ditch. No light, no ventilation. I don't know presently such but in olden times yes. There were prisoners who were made to stay in dungeons, pits, dark and there are prisoners who know the VIPs recently lalu Prasad yadav god bail he was also behind bars but I'm sure the kind of prison what he was in is different from what a normal prisoner is put into. I'm sure he must be getting his meals on time. The newspaper, I'm sure, must have all the amenities. Must have got an attached toilet. All kind of. Maybe a television for him to get updated about the latest happenings. It's also a prison house, but it's a class prison house. So whether it's A class prison house, b class prison house or C class prison house, it's a prison house. Your freedom is checked. So the freedom of the living entity who does not want to die, who does not want to become old, who does not want to become diseased, is choked. Whether it is the heavenly planet or it is the hellish planets, So all scriptures talk about heaven and hell. Heaven and hell are part of this material world. Even if we get promoted there in one sense it is not a great achievement. Because we are still not absolved of the problems of birth, death, old age and disease. I'll just read out some quotes from Srila Prabhupada's teachings. In this way, the living entity forgets his position as an eternal servant of the Lord. Why do we come in this material world? We forget our real position, who we actually are. He instead instead of serving the Lord, he becomes servant of Maya. Maya means that which is not so. If we analyze although we may say that I should not serve anyone, I'm not a servant, why should I serve God? We may rebel, we may put forward these kind of arguments but the fact remains that we are servant. We are serving the dictates of our senses, dictates of our mind. It is his misfortune that by forgetting his real contact with the supreme Lord he becomes a servant of Maya. As servant of Maya, he sometimes becomes a king, heavenly planets and sometimes an ordinary citizen. Sometimes a Brahmana, sometimes a shudra and so on. Sometimes he is a happy man, sometimes a prosperous man. We see all this flux in this material world. Somebody who's very prosperous. He becomes a somebody who's very famous becomes suddenly infamous. Vijay Malia you know, people were such a wealthy businessman. He had so many industries, especially in Bangalore. He was so famous. There is a separate city called UV city. And he got implicated in all this scandalous things. Sometimes he's a happy man, sometimes a prosperous man, sometimes a small insect. Sometimes he's in heaven. We're talking about heaven and hell and sometimes he is in hell. Sometimes he's a demigod. Sometimes the living entity wanders all over the universe. Brahmanda. Brahmite. Kono bhagavanji. We are brahmanda. Brahmite. We are wandering from one planet to another. In this material world, in this material universe only when he comes in contact with a bona fide spiritual master he can understand his real position. Otherwise for all of us, the goal of life is to enjoy life. To enjoy and dabble in sense objects, eat, drink and be merry. Without knowing why are we in this material world? Why there is death? Why there is old age? He thus becomes disgusted with material existence. Bahunam Janmanam Anti after many lives of wandering here there being kicked by Maya like a football. Sometime as a king, sometime as a beggar, sometime in heaven, sometime in hell. At that time he awakens to his Krishna consciousness. Bhunam Janmanam, Ante Gyanvan Mam Prapadhyante krishna says will come to me vasudevam sarvamiti samahatma Durlabha that Atma which has come to the understanding that I should surrender to Vasudeva. And he is all in all. He is the absolute truth. Such an atma is very rare. At that time when he becomes Krishna consciousness he comes to Krishna consciousness. He regrets his past experiences in material world. He regrets because he has come to his senses. This regret is very beneficial because it purifies the living entity. What was I chasing? What kind of wrong goals I had? What kind of aspirations I had? What kind of wrong understanding about life I had? A devotee comes to his senses he then prays to the Lord to engage in his service. And at that time, Krishna grants liberation from the clutches of Maya. So even if one is in the heavenly planet still he is in clutches of Maya. In fact, because the standard of happiness is much higher the possibility of a person forgetting his real position. Just like we had the example of the Govardhan. Leela indra actually forgot that all his powers are coming from Krishna and all that leela was enacted to bring Lord Indra to his senses that all his powers we all know that Leela how Krishna lifted the govardhan hill and Indra sent all the Samvartaka crowds and all kinds of things to destroy Vrindavan. And eventually Krishna protected all the Vrajavasis. And finally indra was defeated. And he comes to his senses, falls at the lotus feet of Krishna. So this world is so designed that we might want to get promoted to heavenly planets. We might want to enjoy heavenly pleasures. But every such pleasure independent of Krishna will have a reaction. Yehi samspar shajab hoga dukhayonahi will result in misery. Nothing comes free in this world whatever enjoyment we might aspire for minus the Lord forgetting our real position as servant of the Lord, we will suffer sooner or later. So devotee comes just like a servant in the house. If he takes the position of the master. He cooks the food. And before even serving the master, he eats it. Starts living in the main bedroom where the master is supposed to be using. And the master gets to know he'll be very upset with him is a crude example so we have taken the position of trying to take the position of the lord try to be the enjoyer to be the lord of all we survey to be the controller, to be the master, to be the enjoyer, to be famous, to be glorified and we suffer the consequences. So therefore it's mentioned here the devotee regrets that. And when he comes to Krishna consciousness comes to his senses, the Lord. Frees him from maya devi asha gunamai mama maya durataya krishna says this divine energy of mind maya is Durata it's very, very difficult to surmount maam avaya prabadhyante maya Mehtam tarantite so a devotee should actually not aspire for heavenly pleasures or heavenly planets getting promoted there should actually, aspire a devotee, actually prays to the Lord. Oh Lord does not matter where you keep me, heaven or hell. All what I want is an opportunity to be engaged. In your service. Srila Prabhupada gives a very nice story how people are so maddened by materialistic pleasures, with no understanding of what is spiritual world, why we are suffering, etc. So one time there were some Christian preachers who went to London and they were preaching in a place where there were coal mines so there were miners there, they were working in dark damp coal mines we all know coal mines below the earth it's very dark, damp and sometimes you heard of some accidents also. So the preachers were telling all the coal miners in the sermon saying that if you do not surrender to Jesus, then you will go to hell. Sometimes the preachers are fanatics. So they said if you do not surrender to Christ, you will go to hell. So some of the miners, they were quite naive, one of them asked what is hell? How does it look like? So they had no clue about what is hell? So the preacher told them hell is a place which is dark, damp, a lot of suffering. So that's what they were doing whole day, morning to night, that was their workplace, so it did not enthuse them, what's the difference? So that's what they are, morning to night. They've got accustomed to that's, their life dark, damn. So it doesn't really inspire them, motivate them to surrender to Jesus, because the status quo remains the same even if they go to hell. It's dark, damp, so is the coal mine where they are working. So then the Christian preacher told them, you know, hell is a place where you will not get newspapers, where you will not get alcohol, drinking. And then all of them came to the oh, that's very no, no, we don't want that place. And then they got inspired yes, we want to surrender to Jesus. So people have no idea that for all the activities we are doing, we are accountable. If we are engaged in sinful deeds, we will have to suffer the consequences. We may degrade ourselves to lower species of life, to hellish planets and if we engage in pious activities, we will elevate to heavenly planets, but still we are not absolved or we are not freed from the cycle of birth and death. And hence the devotee chooses his goals very wisely. His goal is not to get promoted to heavenly planets, his goal is not to enjoy heavenly pleasures. That's the goal for majority 99.99% people, including so called religious and pious people. Their goal is somehow with the blessings of the Lord, enjoy life. I was hearing a lecture in which it was mentioned that for many of us the main meal, just like you, have a main meal and along with the main meal there's a lemon served and on the main meal you can put some lemon, squeeze some lemon and it enhances the taste of the main meal. So for many of us, so called religious people also, the main meal is materialistic pleasures, sensual pleasures and yes, we all 510 minutes in the morning we do some religious activities, some pious activities. It's like squeezing lemon to enhance the flavor, so that we can enjoy our material life nicely, we can have more materialistic pleasures, enhance materialistic happiness. But that's not what a devotee aspires for. So this is the first point which I want to in all scriptures the mention is there of heaven and hell. And as I mentioned, it is part of this material world. And a devotee does not aspire to go to heaven or he is worried about hell. He's always concerned. O Lord, wherever you want to keep me, I don't mind so long as you engage me in your service. Second point is let's understand more about the spiritual world. We talked about heaven and hell. Now what is the spiritual world? Spiritual world Krishna talks about in the Bhagavad gita mana bhavmad bhakto madhyaji mamnamaskaru if you become conscious of me, you will come back to me. Yad gatwa nanivartante taddhamam paramam mama. He talks about spiritual world his dhamma the kingdom of God. And he's inviting all of us. This material world Krishna has declared in the Bhagavad gita as dukhalayam ashwatam. It's a place of misery and asashwatam means it's temporary bhutva bhuttwa praliyate. It has come into being stays for some time and it will be annihilated due course of time. So Krishna is inviting us. We have a desire to lead a life of permanence where there is no death. See how people are so concerned these days. We see death all around us. People are trying all means how we can avoid death how we can avoid getting infected how we can not lose our near and dear ones. There's so much of concern, there's so much of panic. Nothing wrong about it. Because that's the nature of a spirit soul. An Atma, sat chit and Ananda to always be happy and experience sat permanence eternality. But we are wanting to experience that in a wrong place. We are trying to experience sat in a place which is ASAT this material world thinking that if we get promoted to heaven we will experience sat which is not true. So our scriptures also mention of Vaikuntha which is spiritual world. Just like you have material planets likewise you have many spiritual planets. And then the topmost of the spiritual planets is Golok Vrindavan, Golok Dham and a devotee of the Lord aspires that he can go there and serve the Lord in association of all the devotees there. So I'll just read few more quotes from Srila Prabhupada, a self surrendered devotee of the Lord. So we talked about the wrong understanding and now what's the right understanding? What is the understanding of a devotee? He is called Narayana Parayana. Such a person is never afraid of any place or person, not even of death. For him, nothing is as important as the supreme Lord. And thus he gives equal importance to heaven and hell. Actually, in one sense again a pure devotee is not even afraid of death. Because he knows that he is eternal. And his only concern is o Lord, please engage me in your service in heaven or in hell. He knows well that both heaven and hen are creations of the Lord. And similarly, life and death are different conditions of existence created by the Lord. But in all conditions and in all circumstances, the devotee never goes against the will of the Lord. Anything sent by the Lord is taken as a blessing by a devotee. See, we always want peace. We always want happiness. We always want comforts. As a person becomes devotee, his paradigm changes. He is not aspiring for happiness. He is aspiring for how I can always remember you. Mind you having said that, it's a quality of a pure devotee and we have to move in that direction. Somebody may say it's very difficult. What you're talking about is something very idealistic. Yes, it may be idealistic, but the solace is not zero or one logic. It is not that one day when you become a pure devotee, then you will experience freedom from death. As we become devotees, we start experiencing that joy, start experiencing the reciprocation of the Lord, start experiencing that I should not be pursuing all this false materialistic enjoyment and aspiring to go to heaven and hell. Therefore, Maharaj Parikshit was never afraid. We know Maharaj Parikshit was cursed by Shringi to die in seven days because of snake bite. But he was not afraid of death. He just left his kingdom, went to the bank of Ganges, met Sukadev Goswami, heard Shimad Bhagwatam for next seven days and died thinking of the Lord. That will not be our case. If we get to know that in seven days we are passing, we will be having so much anxiety, so many things to settle, because we have so much attachment. Therefore, Maharaj Parikshit was not afraid of death and was not bewildered by such things. That is the sign of a pure devotee of the Lord. So it's a very exalted thing. That's why in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna is saying vedas are talking about you do this, you will get promoted to heavenly planets. You do this, you will get nice, beautiful wife. You do this, you'll get lot of prosperity. Because all kinds of people are there. And vedas are trying to elevate all the people staying in different statuses, different consciousness, different level of their spiritual emancipation and trying to move to the next level. So those statements also have a place. But Bhagavatam calls that dharma or that religion as kaitavadharma cheating religion. Because goal of life is not to get promoted to heavenly planet. Goal of life is not to worship some devi and devta and get a beautiful wife, or get lot of opulence, worship Lakshmi and get lot of wealth. That's not the goal of life. Ravana was very materialistic. He wanted to enjoy Sita minus Ram without knowing or without giving. Having that understanding that it is a property of Ram, it's meant for his enjoyment. And we know that how eventually he was devastated, killed. So, coming back to the third point. The first point was mentioned in all scriptures. All scriptures talk about heaven and hell. And then we talked about how spiritual world is different. From heaven and hell. It is not part of the material world unlike heaven and hell. And now third point is what will take us where? Point is what will take us where? So we talked about if we do Punya, then we get elevated to heavenly planets. If we do papa engage in sinful activities, we get degraded to hellish planets. Therefore, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna talks about karma, Vikarma or impious activities. Karma means pious activities and Akarma akarma means activities which does not have good or bad reactions. So Bhakti or devotional service are those activities which are done for the pleasure of the Lord. Yagnar Tart Karmano anyatra Loko Yam Karma Bandhana if we do any activity which is not performed as Yajna, yajna means for the satisfaction and pleasure of Vishnu or Krishna. Yagnath Karmano anyatra anyatra means anya anya means other than those activities other than Yajna. Yajna means those activities which are meant for satisfying or pleasing the supreme Lord. Yagnath karmano anyatra Loko yam karma bandhana one gets entangled in this material world. Entangled maybe in the heavenly planet or in the hellish planet. Wherever a person may be, he is still entangled in the cycle of birth and death. So Krishna talks about Karma, Vikarma and Akarma. Akarma means those activities which do not have any material reaction good or bad. But it has a spiritual benefit. Materially we may not benefit by getting promoted to heaven or hell but spiritually we get benefited that the soul is getting purified of all the impurities which has covered the soul and it's getting qualified entitled to go back to the original home, the kingdom of God. So all devotional activities. Shravanam Kirtanam Vishnu Smaranam Pada sevanam Archanam worshipping vandanam offering prayers dasyam serving the Lord serving the devotees sakhyam being friends with the Lord develop that maitreya BHAF Sakhyam Atma Nivedram surrendering oneself such activities when performed in relation with the Lord for the pleasure of the Lord will disentangle us from this material world and will take us to the spiritual world. Srila Prabhupada mentions in the Narasimha purana it is said that hellish inhabitants began to chant the holy name of the Lord and they began to elevate from hell towards heaven. So if we are suffering in some hellish condition, that's how we all have the understanding of Shadha ceremony. pindadana lot of people may do it very ritualistically without proper understanding. The proper understanding is when we offer the food to Lord Vishnu, it gets sanctified, it gets spiritualized. And that spiritualized food the remnants we offer to the forefathers pindadana and when a living entity eats spiritualized food then his sinful reactions are burnt. So the concept being that in case the forefathers are suffering in some hellish planets because of the sinful reactions, by partaking the remnants of the food which is offered to Vishnu that spiritualized food, the sinful reactions can be burned to ashes and the soul can be relieved of that suffering. Same thing is being mentioned here that by chanting the names of the Lord, one becomes can get elevated from hell to heaven. Muchante yamnam ni udito narakopi simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, the inhabitants of hell become released from their hellish persecution. The devotees of the Lord are not defeated anywhere in the universe, it is stated. Narayana para survey one. Who is Narayana Para? A devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not afraid anywhere whether he is sent to hell or promoted to heaven. Because a devotee has the greatest wealth, the greatest treasure. And what is that, Narayana? He has the wealth of the consciousness, the remembrance of the Lord. So he is not afraid of hell or heaven and he is just interested in serving the Supreme Lord. Many of us in ignorance out of agyan, not knowing the real thing, our real position we are trying, Prabhupada says in one lecture we are trying to make this place which is dukhalaya a place of misery. We are trying to make it sukhalaya. In other words, Prabhupada also sarcastically says we are trying to make toilet a deity room. Toilet has its place, but a person, if he starts decorating the toilets start, you can't make it a deity room. It is meant for a different purpose. So likewise this material world is created by the Supreme Lord which is also compared to prison house. Rather than aspiring for settling down in this material world and leading a life of peace, prosperity and happiness, a devotee of the Lord aspires to serve the Lord and get promoted to the spiritual world to go back home, back to Godhead. I have received this question many many times from people that we all understand that we suffer because of our sinful deeds, because of the sinful reactions. Would it not be nice if somehow we could correlate if today somebody is suffering? If he can correlate that he's suffering because he did this sin two days back or maybe two months back if he can correlate, then it will be much easier for that person to come to his senses. The logic is quite sound. In other words, if a person is eating beef and let's say he is going through some misery and if he is able to understand the correlation that he is suffering because he has eaten beef in the past, then he will eventually stop eating beef. Just like when a person is penalized for breaking a traffic law, let's say he's not wearing a helmet and police cuts a chalan, then he can correlate that I am being penalized because I am not wearing a helmet and hence he becomes cautious and next time onwards he will be wearing a helmet. But here in this world we are not able to see the correlation. Although conceptually we know we suffer because of our sinful deeds but we are not able to see the correlation. Why is it. So if the Lord can enable such a thing that we are able to see the correlation then everyone will come to the senses and will not do sinful deeds. So people ask why such arrangement is not there? Why don't we remember that I am suffering today because of so and so past sinful deed of mine? The answer is we have come in this material world to be the Lord, to be the enjoyer minus the Lord, itcha Dwisha Samuth, dwandamohe nabharata, itcha desire and Dwisha envy. So if the Lord somehow makes this arrangement that we are able to correlate and remember that we are suffering because of so and so deed of mine, then we will use our intelligence and avoid doing all sinful deeds. And engage only in pious deed and try to settle down peacefully in this material world which is not what the material world is made for. Prison House is not made for somebody to settle down in Prison House. It is meant to punish the criminals so that they realize their mistake, come to their senses and they come out of the Prison house as reformed citizens. So if we are able to see the correlation we will continue to be the Lord, to be the enjoyer, avoid all sinful deeds and try to enjoy and settle down peacefully in this material world which is compared to Prison House which is not the purpose of Prison House. Therefore we will have sufferings. If we engage in materialistic pursuits we will encounter difficulties and challenges. Loko Yam Karma Bandhana will get entangled, maya will torment us and Krishna says Bahunam Janma Namante after many many lives will come to our senses. Vasudevam sarvamiti samahatma Suduralabha so this world is very wonderfully designed by the Lord. He is the most intelligent Lord, the supreme Lord, the cause of all causes. These days lot of people are bewildered where is Lord? There's so much of suffering. The world all over people are suffering because of pandemic. One lady asked me this question why the Lord is not intervening? Why there is so much of suffering? Where is the Lord? And even so called pious religious people get bewildered. Actually the Lord is very kind. The kind of sins we have done the kind of sinful activities we have engaged in the kind of trouble we have given to the Lord the kind of pain we have given to the Lord is nothing compared to the pain what we are undergoing now. I was reading the article in Mumbai alone, there is one slaughterhouse in Chembore which is now functioning at some 20 or 30% of its capacity. And even today, daily about 14,000 cattles are getting slaughtered every day. 14,000. If you go past that slaughterhouse, you'll see truckloads of cattles coming every day and the trucks parked there and it's automated. 14,000 cattles getting slaughtered every day. This is over and above. We find this chicken shop, mutton shop in every corner every street and it's been going on for years. Not only here world over there are so many automated slaughterhouse, lacks and lacks of cows getting slaughtered and the Lord is watching. Don't we think there will be a reaction? In fact Lord has been very very kind and patient. He's been very merciful but he has given us a free will. If we misuse our free will, we'll have to suffer the consequences and that's what we are seeing in this world. If we engage in sinful activities, we will suffer. Now the world is becoming hellish. We can't walk freely, we can't move around freely. Even they say in the house you have to wear a mask and sit because it's airborne. All kinds of theories are now there. So this is hellish life and the reason being we have engaged in lot of sinful deeds so we should come to our senses. Our scriptures Acharyas Srila Prabhupada is giving us the wisdom that human life is meant to come to our senses to become a devotee of the Lord, serve the Lord and eventually go back to the kingdom of God, the spiritual world and enjoy blissful life in association with the Lord. So we'll take some questions. We have some questions which has come in. This question is from Saurav M is the spiritual world manifested or unmanifested? As I mentioned earlier, this material world is Vyakta and Avyakta. Sometimes it is manifest, sometimes it is unmanifest. After the creation it is manifest and after annihilation it will be unmanifest. Mahatva, that sum total of material energy the spiritual world is always manifest. It does not come into being, it does not stay for some time and eventually gets destroyed. That's why Krishna says parastasmatubhavanyo vyakta avyakta sanatana it is sanatana. It is eternal. So the spiritual world is beyond this material world which is manifested and unmanifested. This question is from Saurabh Parihar. It is also come under punya when we help a poor while knowing that he is in the situation because of his karma. Yes, punya activities is when we engage in helping someone. Although that is not the highest kind of activity, it is punya. It is better than doing papa but still one is not freed from the entanglement in this material world and hence a devotee is not interested even in engaging in activities which are called punya. This question is from Lahari how many lifetimes it takes to become a pure devotee of Krishna? Prabhupada was asked this very same question how many lifetimes will it take for us to become a pure devotee of the Lord? Prabhupada says this very lifetime we can become a pure devotee of the Lord. The choice is ours. We have a free will. Krishna says Surrender unto Me Ma'am akam Sharanam Raja but because of our conditioning, because of we have exercised misused our free will for so many lifetimes. We have so much aspirations, so many material desires. It will take some time. The choice is ours. If we want, we can become a pure devotee in this very lifetime. For example, we tell devotees chant 16 rounds. Follow the four regulatory principles. Somebody can potentially start chanting 16 rounds today. Somebody may not even chant 16 round after ten years, the choice is ours. All the instructions are there. The do's and don'ts are there. How to go about leading our lives, how to remember the Lord, how to structure our day irrespective of which ashrama we are situated, how to be conscious of the Lord. Instructions are there. It is left to us how we practice, how much we practice, how sincerely we practice. And if we sincerely practice this very lifetime, we can become Purified and go back to Godhead. This question is from Aryan Sonthalia. How can Sita be considered as a property of Ram to be enjoyed? Sita, we are saying as property of Lord because Sita was the wife of Lord Ramachandra. Legally speaking, wife and husband, they are meant for each other enjoyment. Spiritually speaking, yes. Every one of us are prakriti and the Lord is original Purusha. Every one of us are meant to be enjoyed by the Lord. But in a marriage relationship there is prakriti and Purusha. The man takes the role of Purusha and his wife is meant for enjoyment of the husband. In that sense, I said it is meant for enjoyment of Lord Ramachandra. Being a bona fide wife of Lord Ramachandra. This question is from Lahari. Is it natural that when a person comes to Krishna consciousness he suddenly loses interest on watching movies, entertainment, related stuff and very easily gives up intoxicants like chocolates? Yes, it's a fact. One very easily gives up. There's a verse in the Bhagavad gita vishaya vini virtante niraharas for a dehina for an embodied soul like us vishya vini vartante to give up sense enjoyment is very, very painful and very difficult. That's how people who are not in Krishna consciousness they make lot of plans to cut down their eating, to lose weight. They know that I'm drinking lot of tea and coffee. They will make their resolutions, I will cut down my tea and coffee. They also succeed for a few days, but later on they binge. And whatever they have sacrificed, they again catch up. And that's how we see people. Like a pendulum. They lose some weight for some days, they do some fasting and then again they binge and lose back and get back the same weight. So Krishna says rasovarjam rasopyasya param drishwanivartata. But one when experiences a higher taste, the lower taste peels off. For example, if a person is used to eating sukha chapati with some salt and you go and tell him that you should eat fruits and vegetables, the sukha chapati will not have enough vitamins, minerals. It is not a wholesome diet. The person does not have much choice because he can afford only sukha chapati. You tell him to stop. He will not stop because he is hungry. But if you give him a better option and you tell him that I will daily provide you with nice sumptuous meal from the temple rajbo, can you give up sukha chapati? He will easily give up. Same is our case when we come to Krishna consciousness. When we start chanting Krishna's name when we start hearing Bhagavad Gita then we experience a higher taste. This higher taste is not imaginary, it's a real thing. Raso virjam raso piasya param drishtwanivartate. We experience a higher taste. And because of this higher taste automatically without even we wanting we start losing taste for lower things. We should not be afraid. Somebody may get afraid now somebody may get little scared that if I start chanting a lot of people get scared that if I start chanting I lose taste for movies. I lose taste for nice food stuff and I don't want to do that. So therefore I will not chant. Actually we should not get scared. We may lose something but Krishna will provide us something much higher, much better, much greater. Krishna may take away something but in return he will provide us something much higher and much greater. So we should not be afraid. What if I lose taste for lower thing? How will I enjoy life? Yes, Krishna will give us a higher taste and we'll enjoy much higher pleasures. And yes, we should be little cautious. Sometimes our family members will misunderstand because they will see that suddenly we've started attending Gita classes, started chanting and all of a sudden we are becoming completely, according to them abnormal. Because abnormal people don't watch movies. Abnormal people do not go. Normal people watch movies. Normal people eat all kinds of food stuff. So we have to be little cautious because we are living in a family. We have to deal with family members. So we can take some guidance from devotees who are experienced how to handle such changes which will come about in us and how to handle our near and dear ones. It requires some maturity and I'm sure some devotees who have gone through such changes they will have that required experience and they'll be able to guide how to go about dealing with such changes. This question is from Aryan Jain. Why Arjuna? Even after gaining knowledge of Bhagavad Gita and seeing Krishna live being friends with him, accepting him as master still had to go to heaven and not moksha. I am not sure what you are referring to. But one thing I can say for sure that Arjuna similar question was asked that Arjuna was in the company of the Lord. Then how Arjuna fell in illusion in Maya, how Arjuna fell in ignorance? So the answer is although Krishna is with Arjuna still whatever Arjuna went through his in illusion in ignorance that was a leela of the Lord. So that Arjuna could ask some very very pertinent and relevant questions and Krishna could give answers to this question not only for Arjuna but for the entire mankind. Arjuna asked these wonderful questions in the Bhagavad Gita and the replies to those questions is not for Arjuna but for the entire mankind. Had Arjuna not fallen in illusion and that conversation wouldn't have happened maybe we would have been bereft of this wonderful immortal message of the Gita. Although Gita is also eternal sanatana. And Krishna tells that I am speaking this knowledge again to you today. It is not that Bhagavad Gita is 5000 years old knowledge. This was spoken to Sun God Vivaswan then to Manu, then to Ikshwaku Avam Parampara Praptam it was coming down in a parampara. And then Krishna tells because the original intent because it was destroyed I am speaking that same very knowledge to you again O Arjuna. So in the case of Arjuna what all he went through? The kind of ignorance, the kind of dilemma it is part of the overall plan of the Lord to share this immortal message of Bhagavad Gita with us this question is from Chirag Prajapati will there be any difference if a devotee along with pious activities staying in a mode of passion for him? If I have understood the question correctly can a devotee while doing devotional service engaging in serving the Lord can he also engage in pious activities? The answer is that even if we want to, we suddenly cannot give up all our natural inclinations, we cannot give up our ignorance. All of a sudden, we cannot give up our tendency, our material desires all of a sudden. So yes, if a person is engaging in pious activities, it is better than engaging in sinful activities and slowly. One should understand and discriminate the difference between pious activity and spiritual activity and try more and more to engage in spiritual activities. Otherwise, for many people, engaging in pious activity is the highest is the most benevolent thing to do. So that we should differentiate this question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. It is said that we came to this material world because we wanted to enjoy independent of God. How can one who is already in bliss in the spiritual world demand to enjoy away from God? It's a wonderful question very relevant question that if a person was in the company of the Lord how can this desire come? The answer is that Krishna has given us a free will. We are not like robots programmed to act in a particular way. Today you are attending this Gita live session. You have chosen to attend. You have a choice right now. You can switch off and log out from this particular channel. The choice is yours. Right now. We can make a different choice. So likewise that potential potential of misusing the free will is there the very fact that we have got free will although the potential is very less. They say accidents happen even on royal roads. Death happens even in countries which are replete with wonderful medical infrastructure. So, because we have free will, yes, there is a potential that we will misuse it and hence we come to this material world. But Krishna promises once we go back, we'll not come back to this material world. Somebody may say still, yes, we have the potential still. But because we have suffered so miserably in this material world and bahunam janmanam ante gyanvan mam prapadhyante after many, many lives of suffering we have come to our senses. Then, once we go back to the spiritual world, we'll not come back to the material world. In Hindi there's a saying dudki jali billy chachkobi Pukpu kepiti. In the sense if you put a hot boiling hot cup of milk and the cat gets burned because of that hot boiling milk, next time you even give buttermilk, the cat will be very, very cautious and will be very cautious in drinking the buttermilk which is cold. So that is the answer. Deepak Nathwani. This is a comment from him lord Krishna will never forgive beef eaters. It's a fact that sinful activities we may do knowingly or unknowingly the reaction will be there. And Krishna, who is go Brahmana hitayacha he is very, very dear to the cows and the Brahmanas. So if we engage in such sinful activities, definitely we'll have to suffer. So today's world is actually a lot of people are, as I mentioned wondering where is Lord? Actually, what we are suffering is very minuscule and negligible compared to the pain we have given to the Lord by slaughtering innocent animals just for our taste buds. I think we should be suffering even more. This question is from Lahari. Why some people can't give up meat eating and material attachments even after reading Bhagavad Gita and being followed Bhakti for many years. As I mentioned, we have got a free will. We have a choice. Today I can very forcefully say that we should chant 16 rounds. But not everyone is ready to take it up. So every soul is at a different level of the spiritual emancipation. In fact, Arjuna asked this question to Krishna what happens if a person treads this path but does not complete the journey and gets bewildered because of worldly mindedness, gets distracted? What happens to such a person? It can happen to any one of us. Today we are interested in Krishna consciousness. But somehow we can get swayed. So Krishna tells he will take birth in the next life in the family of pious Brahmanas or learned Brahmanas or rich aristocracy. And he will continue from where he has left in this very life. So all of us are this life is not all in all. All of us are at different stages of our spiritual growth. And some of us are very strong as far as our desire to be Krishna conscious. And some of us have a very weak desire and basis that some of us want to enjoy the best of both worlds. We want to little bit of Krishna consciousness also. Chant two rounds, four rounds and continue with our material activities also. All kind of people are there. This question is from Yash Gangani. When a devotee is in devotional activity, what kind of thinking should he keep through that I am devoting to Krishna who will solve my problem of birth and death or my business is devotion. In fact, a devotee should not worry about solving the problem of birth and death. A devotee worry should be to always remember Krishna and never forget Krishna. That should be the worry of the devotee. He should not forget the Lord and should always try to remember the Lord. That should be his concern. That should be his worry. Whether Krishna takes him back to Godhead whether Krishna takes him to heaven or hell the Joyce is left to the Lord. He is not concerned about that. In fact what is spiritual world? A lot of people may wonder what is spiritual world? Spiritual world is where people are all engaged in unalloyed devotion to the Lord. Serving the Lord the Lord is in the center. Everyone is glorifying the Lord. So when a devotee gets that opportunity even in the material world to serve the Lord to glorify the Lord to remember the Lord for that devotee even this world becomes a spiritual world. Because spiritual world means what he is always engaged in serving the Lord thinking of the Lord. So even the material world becomes a spiritual world for a devotee if he is always conscious of Krishna. This question is from Lahari. We can never do that. This question is Deepank bansal. If doing pious activities will bind us to enjoy the result it should be avoid doing pious activities. Please guide. Yes. We should not aspire to do punya with the objective of promoting to heavenly planets. Yes, we may engage in some pious activities. But we should know the difference between pious activities and spiritual activities. We should know that the bottom of the scale is impious activities sinful activities. Better than that or higher than that is pious activities punya. But that's not the highest. As I told, for many people, punya is the highest. Even higher than punya is spiritual activities which is activities done in devotional service or bhakti and devotees should aspire for that. This question is from Sripad Shende. How to ensure we are always in the state of Krishna consciousness when there are so many distractions around us of Maya? First thing is we should be conscious that wherever we are whatever circumstances we are in it's because of our deeds in the past we have chosen. We are responsible for where we are. So therefore we don't blame circumstances. We don't blame Lord, we don't blame anybody. We take responsibility. I am where I am because of what I have done in the past. Having said that, just like here today we read even if one a person is in hellish condition if he chants the name of the Lord, he gets promoted. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu says than is Tite wherever you are, whatever circumstances you are in stan is Tite. Be situated there and engage in devotional service of the Lord. The Lord will help us advance will gradually help us to make the circumstances more conducive. The Lord will help us. That material energy that Maya which is pulling us down. The Lord will free us from the influence of Maya. Maam avaya prapadhante. Mayam etam tarantite will free you from the illusory energy. Maya how much time will it take? Depends on our sincerity. Depends on how sincerely, how eagerly we want to progress in our Krishna consciousness. This question is from Uma Kumara. Is it possible to correlate when the sin committed may not fructify in this life? As I mentioned, the sin committed may have a reaction in this life. May have a reaction in next life. There is no point in desiring to correlate. Because even if we correlate, the goal is not to settle down peacefully in this material world and avoid all kind.