Hare Krishna a warm welcome to all of you for today's Gita Life session. The topic for the day is work Life balance. We all strive to strike a good balance between the various responsibilities, duties, interests we have but many a times, in spite of our best efforts we see ourselves off balance more so, when we are practicing spiritual life we at times find it very difficult to balance our material and spiritual aspirations. So today's session is all about this. We're going to discuss few insights from the Bhagavad gita what Krishna has to say about regulation in our lives. So today the first part we're going to discuss about why do we go off balance? Yes, it's a fact that we find ourselves off balance. We are not able to balance various commitments we have various aspirations, we have more. So when we want to practice spiritual life, want to incorporate some spiritual practices in our daily schedule what could be the reason why we go off balance? As spirit, soul as atma, the quality of the soul being amsha of the Lord. Krishna says mama amsha jiva loke jeeva bhuta sanatana. So as amsha of the Lord, we have the same quality. We are sat, we are chit and we also are blissful ananda. But when we come in this material world and have a material body and the soul gets contaminated by lust, greed, pride, envy all these base qualities which in Hindi we call it calm crowd lobe, then we start behaving very differently from our original state. Because of greed, there is intense hankering. We're never satisfied with our current position. We want more. And it is not that because we are not having some basic necessities of life therefore we are striving for something more. In spite of having everything, because of that greed, because of that lust, because of that envy, because of that pride constantly we are in a state of wanting more, desiring more, never satisfied. Brahma bhuta prasanna atma nasochati nakankshati when a person is self realized, when he is transcendentally situated he is brahmabuta and what are the symptoms of such a person? He is nashochati nakankshati, he doesn't hanker, he doesn't lament but in present times our state is quite in contrast to this glorious state of an exalted personality who is self realized. So we as souls we have got covered with the base qualities of lust, greed, pride, envy and also because of the past karmic reactions we have got entangled and we find ourselves in different circumstances which could be very very compelling. Much against our wish, we are forced to do certain things which we don't want to do. Much against our wish, we are forced to engage in activities which, after having understood the Bhagavad gita to whatever extent we are, reluctant to engage in so predominantly speaking, our present diseased condition lust, greed, pride, envy which has covered the soul and also because of the entanglement which has ensued because of our past karmic reactions. If you all remember, we have shared in one of our previous sessions the example of a cow tied to a pole. And depending on the length of the rope, the cow is free to move. Suppose the length of the rope is 5 meters. Then in a five meter radius, the cow can freely move. If the length of the rope is 2 meters, then the cow can only move within a radius of 2 meters, and beyond that it will be restricted. So likewise, figuratively speaking, each one of us are tied. We don't have freedom, absolute freedom. Although we may call ourselves, we have constitutional rights. We are living in a free country. Every year we have Independence Day being celebrated. In that sense, we are not independent. We are bound. What are those ropes? The ropes of material nature, the modes of material nature. Satvoguna rajoguna tamoguna so they are binding us. And we have been put in different circumstances, different situations. And based on the contaminations which has covered the soul, we are forced to engage in various activities. Once there was a big, very eminent businessman who was on a vacation with his family in a small coastal village in Mexico. So he was having his good time. He was relaxing in the sun on a beach, having a stroll with his wife, with his family. And one day he noticed on the beach there was a fisherman who just came in with his boat from the sea. And as soon as he deboded, he came down from his boat, he could glance that he had just got a nice bounty of fish which he has caught in the sea, in the fishing net. So all the fishes were there, and from a distance, he could make out the quality of the fish was very, very good. So he asked the boatman, the fisherman, how much time did you spend in catching these fishes? So he said, Just half an hour to 1 hour. And he says, whatever I have caught, that's good enough for me for my requirement, and I can just sell it off in the market and whatever my needs are getting met. So this businessman, he was from an Ivy League college, had done his MBA from Stanford. So he looked at the fisherman and said, Can I give you a suggestion? And he laughed and said, I'll not charge you for that, by the way. The fisherman said, yes, sir, most welcome. She said, If I were you, if I was in your position, I would spend minimum seven to 8 hours in the sea catching fishes, seeing the quality of the fish, I can make out this big market for these fishes. And when I sell these fishes, I can earn lot of money. And eventually I can have two boats. I can have three boats, I can have five boats. Eventually, I can have a whole big set of boats each one of them catching many fish and I can really expand my business so this fisherman was looking at him trying to understand what he is proposing so he said then what? Then what? He says, Once I have lot of fishing boats and I catch lot of fish, then I don't have to sell in retail. I can go to the processing industry directly. I can avoid all this middlemen who make lot of money and profits. I can directly go to the industry and sell the fishes and make huge money. So this fisherman seemed interested with this proposal. He says, Then what will happen? He says, Once I have all this, eventually I can have my own processing unit because I'll have so much fishes, I'll have so much of money I can invest. I can have my own processing industry. Backward integration we can do. We don't have to depend on others and others make profit on RBS. We can have our own industry. So the fisherman was quite amused. He says, Then what happens? He says eventually the business would have grown so much then I can have an IPO and I can release the shares and make the whole thing public and I can bring in more investment eventually I can have lot of money being made so the fisherman asked then what sir? He says eventually I can have my head office set up in Mexico City and I can trade and I can export and eventually I can be earning in dollars I can have an export business then what? He says then a time will come. 30 years. 40 years. You have made enough money. You don't have to worry about your finances. You don't have to worry about going and catching fishes. Then you can go take up. A small house in a coastal village and have an easy going life. Relax. Spend time with your family. You don't have to worry about earning your livelihood. You can enjoy life. You can stroll on the beaches with your wife. Play with your family, with your children. So the villager heard all that? He said, that's what I am doing now, what you're asking me to do and achieve after so much of hard work and 30 years from now, if everything goes well, the state where I would be is my present state. I spend time with my family 2 hours. 1 hour. I do fishing and the balanced time. I am enjoying playing with my children and all that. This is just to give you a sense that how unlimited greed we have the state of being where we are never satisfied with our present condition messes up our lives, entangles us. Actually, one of the quality of the soul is contentment. Why contentment? Not because in a pure state a person is lazy Prabhupada was so enthusiastic he traveled the globe 14 nine at the age of he went to the West US at the age of 70 years he was always busy at times sleeping for 2 hours, 3 hours, 4 hours, balance time. Always working, always answering to letters and meeting people, talking to his disciples, giving classes, writing the books. So it's not that a spiritually evolved person is is lazy, he is satisfied with the status quo. No, but there is inherent contentment. There is no that greed for sense gratification. Now, why this greed really takes a toll on us? Because we as spirit souls, we want happiness, we want enjoyment. That's our natural constitution position. Anandamayo Vyasat you ask hundred people, each one of them may have different aspirations, different goals, different likings, different hobbies but for sure, without even asking them one thing I can tell very confidently each one of them is trying different ways to be happy. Somebody may have a sense of perspective that by doing this, by achieving this, by being this I will be happy. So we all want to be happy. And all our pursuits are aimed for that ultimate objective of being happy, being satisfied, being contented. That's the quality of the soul. Now, when we are in this contaminated state, in this material body, in this bodily concept of dehatma buddhi I am the body, then our definition of happiness changes from because when I think I am the body, then if I have to be happy, then I have to gratify my senses only source of happiness. What I have in ignorance is through sense gratification. My eyes wants to see beautiful forms, ears wants to hear some beautiful melodious sounds, skin wants to touch something soft, something nice. So sense gratification ensues and that becomes the goal of life. For most of the people in this world, the goal of life is to enhance their sense gratification, to find, to earn more money so that we can have a bigger house, better cars, better standard of living, better things. To eat better vacations gratify our senses with the hope, with the understanding, with the underlying assumption that by gratifying the senses more and more I'll be happy. More and more, which Krishna says there is a fallacy in this understanding. In fact, the truth is that more and more we gratify the senses, the more and more we will get entangled and more and more we will get miserable. Yehi samspar shajab hoga dukayona Hivate so because of the contaminations which are there covering the soul, because of greed, because of the circumstances we are born with, because of our past karmic reactions, we all are entangled thinking that goal of life is to gratify the senses to make me happy. We all are caught up in this rat race. Never satisfied, always desiring having so many material desires, always dissatisfied, having no contentment, always wanting more and more, more money, more career growth, better standard of living and that becomes the kind of a rat race which we get caught up in. So this is the cause why we go off balance. Today's session is work life balance. Why we go off balance? The root cause is the ignorance. The root cause is all the base qualities which has covered us and also because of even though we may be leading a spiritual we want to lead a spiritual life. We don't want all this jing bing material desires. We have come to our senses still the Karmic reactions, the forces are there. We are born in certain circumstances which are quite compelling. So that's the cause, the root cause because of which we go off balance. Now, the second point which you're going to cover today is what is the solution? Yes, we all know that we go off balance but what's the solution? What should we do? Today morning I was reading one article this was about Jeff Bezos. Amazing. So in that article, the article was talking about the three things which he does which makes him very productive, very efficient and as we all know, he is one of the richest men in the world. So one of the conditions, one of the things when I saw this headline so I got interested what are the three things he does? So one of the things he does, he said is set boundaries. This is very interesting. Set boundaries. Now, what is the meaning of setting boundaries? Again, theoretically speaking, it's easy to say but practically speaking, depending on the circumstances we are in, sometimes the circumstances can be so compelling that we may not be able to translate this understanding into practical application but still we can try. We have the right to do our duty, we can put efforts and obviously if we want to strike a balance and also increase our time for spiritual activities, lord will also help. So set boundaries. What is the meaning of boundaries? Boundaries means we all are limited. We all have limited time, we have limited energy. We are not God, we cannot achieve unlimited. We don't have unlimited time, we don't have unlimited energy, we don't have unlimited strength, we don't have unlimited hours in a day, we don't have unlimited years in our life. In all sense we have limitations. So we cannot achieve everything which we desire. We cannot work 18 hours, 20 hours and turn the table upside down and somehow make things happen. We have limitation. Now, Krishna in the Gita talks about regulation. We'll come to that. That's the third point which are going to discuss in detail. So setting boundaries means one can say that I will work for 8 hours, 9 hours in a day. So Jeff Bezos, he says imagine the person running a big organization. I heard that on the month of June he's handing over somebody else is going to be the CEO. So such a big company with so much of demand for his time, so many things which he has to put his energy into. But still he has made some boundaries. Boundaries in terms of how he will spend his time. How much time will he spend with whom? All he will spend his time. In other words, some thought has gone behind that's. So for example, sleeping, I will sleep by, let's say 10:00 p.m.. Now I'll illustrate this whole thing with one story. There was a person who was very busy, he was running a company and it was a startup and he was spending 16 to 18 hours in office. And naturally he became diabetic and high blood pressure, always anxious. So finally his health started deteriorating and eventually he had to go to a doctor. So when he went to the doctor, doctor did a thorough checkup of his whole body parameters and all that and he says I don't think that you are in good condition, you need to relax. Your BP is high. And he was quite upfront and he showed all those things reports and said the BP is high and now you're in a diabetic state and all that things you'll have to relax. So this person said that doctor, you don't know my condition, everything rests on me. So then the doctor, with whatever limited knowledge he had, he says but why can't you delegate? You can recruit some nice people, talented people and delegate some of your responsibilities. He says Doctor, you don't know everything rests on my shoulder. Even if I hire the best of talents, they won't be able to do the way I am doing. I have to strategize, I have to plan, I have to arrange for finances. I can't hire a person for all this. Even if I hire finally it rests on my shoulder. I'll have to involve in all critical strategic decision making process. So then the doctor asks so how many hours you put in? He says 16, 18 hours. At times I even take work back home. How many hours you sleep? 4 hours, 5 hours. So the doctor said I'll give you a prescription. I don't think you have other option but to follow this prescription of mine. So this man reluctantly asked okay, what's the prescription? What do you want me to do? This is I want you for the next few weeks, every Saturday spend half a day in the graveyard. So this man was really put off by what the doctor has said. He says I have come to you, I am in a state where I am telling that I have no time and you're telling you're giving me a prescription that I should spend half a day in the graveyard. The symmetry, what should I do? So he says why don't you try this Saturday somehow follow my prescription, please go to a graveyard and spend good amount of time there, at least half a day there. So this man reluctantly agreed and you know, busy people they are every moment they want to be engaged, they want to be productive, they want to keep doing things. And if they are in an environment where there's nothing to do. They feel very uneasy. Sometimes people are workaholics just like you have alcoholics, you have workaholics without work, they feel completely uneasy. They want to work, they want to always engage different activities, which is good in one sense. We shouldn't be lazy. So this man went to a graveyard, a symmetry, and there what will he do? But somehow he had to follow the prescription the doctor had given. So he was getting very restless, impatient, watching his just seeing the time. When will this time get over? And he can go and tell the doctor that he has spent the time next what? So then, since he had few hours to spend, he started strolling around, walking around the graveyard, the symmetry. And there he saw the tombstones so and so person, CEO of so and so company, born so and so year, died so and so year and something about that person. And then he went to the next one and the next one, and he started reading. Somehow he had to pass the time, started reading. And then it started dawning on him. These all are very eminent people, CEOs and some person who was a big business magnet and all of them are now in the cemetery lying. So he went back to the doctor after having spent the time there and he had got the point basically what the doctor was trying to drive home. So the doctor asked, So how was the day? So he reluctantly said, yes, it was quite good. There's a lot of learning for me. So then the doctor said, that's what I wanted you to understand. You think that without you the world, your company will come to a grinding halt. You are inevitable, you are indispensable. Without you, things won't move. I want you to go and get a firsthand experience. All these so called eminent people who are running big, big empires, business empires, thinking that without them the companies will completely fall. Or thinking that they are indispensable. Now they are lying there in the symmetry and the world is still on, the company is still going on. None of us are indispensable. Yes, we all have responsibilities, but still, if there is in our thinking that without me things won't move, that's incorrect. Understanding. Like last two, three sessions I could not take. I was down with COVID But somehow things moved on. Somebody took care of the sessions and it went on. So we can set boundaries. Boundaries in terms of our time, boundaries in terms of what we will do and what we will not do. Boundaries in terms of whom all we will socialize with we cannot attend, all the functions we cannot attend, all the parties, we cannot attend, all the social obligations we cannot we have to draw boundaries. It may not be easy, but at least we should know that we have limitations. We cannot do everything because of the we have to sleep, to rejuvenate. We also have to chant our rounds. We have to spend time in our spiritual aspirations, our spiritual duties and we have limited 24 hours in a day. We cannot do everything. So we have to prioritize what we can do. What we cannot do. Many of us have heard about to do list. Whenever we talk about planning our day, planning our time, time management there is concept of to do list where you jot down everything which you want to do and you tick it off as you keep doing it. It's called to do list. There's another very important concept which is now picking up. More important than to do list is not to do list. Many of us spend up inordinate amount of time doing things which actually do not add any value into our lives. We get pushed into things or just because we are indisciplined, just because we haven't planned, just because we haven't prioritized, just because we haven't drawn the boundaries just because we haven't applied or thought what I can do and what I should not do. Our life is just like a time is open for everyone. We get invitations. And then if we don't have those boundaries, then at times we even can't refuse boundaries in terms of how much time I will devote for my official work and whatever time we and if we really regulate. That's the third point which we are going to talk about in detail, which is the instruction of Krishna in the gita. Before we come to the third point, get into that detail, what Krishna is recommending in the gita, we will spend some time, we will have kirtans. All of us can enthusiastically join, participate in the kirtans and then we'll come back to the discussion and cover the third point. Ram, ram. Ram. Harishina. Krishna. Kishana. Hallel. Wanduranga. Ram. Wanda, wanda. Ital now, it's now. It's about ha it's the honey, honey, honey somebody so it's not it all somewhere. It's like it's the way. Put it out. What if it's the way? It's not it what if you somebody put it out. You Sashana. Hari. Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari. Ram rap what we have so far discussed first we covered why we go off balance and in that we talked about the base qualities of lust, greed, envy because of which there's intense hankering and we all have unlimited material desires. So that's one thing. And second thing is the force of circumstances basis which we can also go off balance. We may be in circumstances which are very trying, which are very entangling we have no option but to work for 12 hours, 14 hours, 16 hours. So there could be possibility like that. So that's the reason we talk about the reason why we go off balance. And then as a solution we talked about that we have to set boundaries. We have limited time, we have limited energy. We are not Krishna that we can expand into multiple forms and do multiple things simultaneously knowing that we have limited time, limited energy. We have to plan our day, we have to some bit plan our lives. We have to define boundaries. Where I have to spend my time, how much time I can spend, whom all I can meet, what all I can delegate. The third point, which Krishna talks about in the Bhagavad Gita, there's a direct verse. I'll just read out the translation. This is the 17th verse. In the 6th chapter of the Bhagavad Gita where Krishna says one who is temperate, one who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work in other words, this verse is directly talking about the balance. And Krishna says one who is regulated in his eating, in his sleeping, recreation and work can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system. So we'll talk about this regulation, part of it. Regulation is very, very important. It is in continuation to the point number two, which we have covered, that is set boundaries. We all need to we have, broadly speaking, four dimensions of our life the physical, the body, our health, which we have to take care of, we have to invest some time. The mental dimension, the mind, the emotional dimension, managing our emotions, feelings, mental, emotional can become mind. And then we have the social dimension. We're living in a society, we are living in an ecosystem. So there are some commitments, there are some responsibilities which we have. And then the fourth dimension is the spiritual dimension. Just like a car runs on four wheels, likewise our life also figuratively can be if we have to run it nicely. These are the four wheels. And just like we know that the wheels have to be balanced, the wheel balancing which we have heard about. So likewise we have to strike a balance between these requirements or these aspects of our life. Sometimes people overly focus on the physical dimension, spend time I know a person who spends 2 hours in a gym every day. If I ask him, he chants one round. He says Swamiji, I asked him what is your schedule? How do you start your day? So he says my health was quite bad, so my father recommended and then he spends 2 hours in the gym, gets up at 06:00 in the morning till 830. He's in the gym. So, physical dimension, it is important, but we have to strike a balance. Regulation, knowing that exercise is important to keep the body healthy, but we have to strike a balance. As I said, we have limited time, limited energy, limited things which we can put our hand onto. We have 24 hours, so we have to use discretion. And then we have the social dimension, the friends, relatives, near and dear ones, the whole ecosystem in which we operate. We have to define boundaries, we have to regulate not every party. We can accept an invitation and attend. We have limitation. And then we have the mental and the emotional dimension, investing on our own selves, investing on our betterment, our improvement. So that's another dimension which in Krishna consciousness. If we spend time in the spiritual dimension automatically, this dimension is very nicely taken care of. And the fourth dimension, as I mentioned, the most important one is the spiritual dimension. Although we can have some quick fixed solutions to delegate and organize our lives, set boundaries, but the ultimate solution comes from investing good quality of time in the spiritual dimension. It's not because I am a swamiji and today we are having a Gita session. Therefore we are talking about that why it is important. Because if we spend time this reminds me of a saying. Martin Luther, you've heard about him? He said looks like I will have to spend two more hours on my knees in prayer because I have lot of work to do today. He says I am so busy today. Looks like I'll have to spend an additional hour on the knees today. Now it looks contradiction. He says I am so busy today, I have so much work to do. Looks like I'll have to spend additional hour on the kneels today. On the kneels means in prayer because we do not spend good quality time and quantity of time in the spiritual dimension. That's a root cause why we are off balance. It's a root cause, as I said, for soul in its pure state is Satchit ananda. It's intrinsically happy. It does not want everything in this world so much of sense gratification, so much of arrangement, so much of money for it to be happy. That's why we have examples of great exalted personalities rishis Munis they were living in simple cottages, very simple life, but they were completely satisfied, completely blissful serving the Lord, remembering the Lord, glorifying the Lord. So when we spend time in the spiritual dimension and strike a balance yes, we have a lot of questions today saying that in COVID time a person can even lose job. We have to work hard. Yes, we are living in such circumstances, but still we have to strike a balance. So spiritual dimension, if we spend time, it purifies us. It purifies us of our base qualities lust, greed, pride, envy, which is a root cause why we go off balance and it also burns to ashes the karmic reactions, because of which we are suffering and because of which we are entangled. So when we spend time and we regulate our eating, sleeping, recreation and work, then Krishna says one can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system. There was a saintly person who was organizing satsang in a city and he met a businessman and he said why don't you join for the satsang? Every Saturday we have a session organized. So this man said swamiji, I want. To attend. But what to do? I have this business I've just now started. I'm all alone. I have to look into all the things, procurement and selling, and then cash, the finances, the banking, I'm all alone. What to do? Swamiji? I'm not so fortunate that I can attend your Satsang. But I'm waiting for the right time. Once my business is set, then for sure I have a desire to also attend the Satsung. So Swamiji heard him out and he says May Lord bless you and went off. After a few years the Swamiji again met this businessman. By this time he had a big store, he had 810 employees. And so Swamiji again invited. Now that you have big store and a lot of employees, you can come for Satsang. Now please find says no Swamiji, this big store is there. Although all so many employees are there. But I can't fully leave to them a lot of finance related thing, banking related thing, I have to personally involve and all those things. And my children are growing up for sure. When my sons also grow up and they start engaging in my whole family gets involved in the business, then definitely I will come for your Satsang. So Swamiji heard him out and said okay, all the best, may Lord bless you. And went. A few years later on Swamiji again met this person. And this time the business had grown. And then his elder son had also started engaging in the business, involved in that same family business. And the Swamiji met him and said why don't you come for Satsang? So he said, Swamiji, just now my elder son has joined the business, I have to train him. And the younger one is he's just finishing his education. And once these boys, they start involving in the business and I delegate, a time will come, few years I am also waiting for it and I can then come for Satsan. And few years later on this man, this saintly person kept was quite persistent and again visited this place, this person. And this time when he entered the shop, his two sons were there. And just behind that cashier this thing, they saw one picture. And the picture was the photo of this man with a garland. So he asked the sons. So the son said just few days back he expired, there was a heart attack. So we cannot especially abhagavatam says we all are entangled. It's a fact. We all are caught up in this material world. We have base qualities. We know. Yes, lust is there, greed is there. We are under the clutches of anger, envy, jealousy. We are proud of little bit accomplishment. We do. We all have that. It's a great opportunity for us to purify. It's a root cause because of which we are entangled. Human form of life affords a wonderful opportunity. Tunam yate, anapate anumritu yavan before we again fall into the clutches of death, which is inevitable, more so in present time. Now it is quite scary in the sense that aliya we used to hear only post 60 70 years and at times some accidents. But these days inevitably we hear somebody 30 years, 40 years, 45 years. In ICU, I was reading an article in the last month May the mortality rate was 2% lot of people who got infected on an average in India last month there was about 4000, OD deaths happening. And many young people also got infected, left the body. So we have limited time, we have limited energy, limited number of years which we are there in this human body. So if we invest our time the right things and beg the Lord for his intervention in our life, sometimes we can go in a positive spiral or we can go in a negative spiral. Because we are entangled, we do not spend time. Because we are entangled, we cannot spend quality time. And because we cannot spend quality time and quantity of time, we remain entangled or get more and more entangled. Rich becomes richer, poor becomes poorer. Person is already poor because of which he lost the job. Because he's already poor, he has already lost the job. He's getting more deeper and deeper into the poverty cycle. Likewise spiritually also we can be in a positive cycle or we can in a negative cycle. Positive cycle is when we spend good amount of time and good quality time with the Lord. The Lord will intervene in our lives, will purify us of our base qualities. He will direct our lives. If you become conscious of me, you will cross over all obstacles of conditional life by my grace. Krishna is saying that in the Gita so rich becomes richer, poor becomes poorer. Likewise, we may be spiritually poor at this time. But if we somehow invest our time and show to the Lord yes, Lord, I am entangled. I am in a very deplorable situation. I need your help. I need your guidance. Please take charge of my life. Please direct my life. I offer prayers, I engage in activities which are prescribed in the Bhagavad Gita, follow the instructions of great acharyas and then automatically, by the grace of the Lord, we start improving. Our life starts improving. It may take few days, it may take few months, it may take few years. We cannot expect that today I have started becoming devotees. I have started chanting immediately my life should get sorted out. No, for years together for many many lives we have engaged in activities having conveyed to the Lord I don't want you, I'll manage myself. Now suddenly when we have gone to the Lord, we cannot expect that all the past baggage in no time will get completely finished and I'll be a pure soul. No, it takes time. So we invest time and then definitely Lord is there. Makchita sarvadurgani mad Prasada tarishasi krishna says Sarvadharman parityA jamam akam sharanam Raja hamtum sarvape masuchakrishna is assuring and when we Krishna gives us Gyna Krishna gives us Bala gives us Kriya Today we talked about setting boundaries. Krishna will give us the knowledge. Krishna will give us the strength. Krishna will give us the abilities, the skills required he is there in our heart. Next moment what thoughts come in our mind. We are not in conscious control. Suddenly a thought pops up. It could degrade me. It could also elevate me. Although I have free will. But we are not in conscious control of every thought which pops up in our mind. So when we chant attentively when we associate with the Lord the Lord who is all pure who has descended in the form of his name when we touch that Lord who is all pure we also get purified. So we will take up some questions. We have lot of questions which have come up today. This question is from Rahul Kumar. If we do not have a sense of achieving more and more how will progress happen in the society and also better life for people around us? We are not against progress. Our scriptures is not against accomplishment but right kind of accomplishment. Right kind of progress. It is said that more important than the speed at what you are moving is the direction in which you are moving. What if a person wants to go to Delhi and he moves very fast. He takes the fastest means of transportation. Let's say he catches a flight. But what if the flight is going in the wrong direction? Better than that a person in a bullock card going in the right direction. So we are not against accomplishment. Accomplishment. A sense of achievement yes is very important. But with right understanding, with right knowledge, the right direction and that is what scriptures are giving us. Another question from Rahul Kumar. If you're not expected to satisfy our body and only progress for the refinement of soul then why we are born in human form? Very basic question. Kindly excuse my ignorance. That's why Krishna we just talked about the third point. Krishna says one who is regulated in his eating, sleeping, recreation and work. So Krishna is not giving us impractical solution. Yes. We are in this body. We have to take care of the body also. It's like a yantra. Just like when I am not the car but I have to use car. So I have to take care of my vehicle also. So likewise we can fulfill the demands of the body but regulate it. Today's world fulfilling the demands of the body is considered as the ultimate goal of life. The philosophy is eat, drink, eat, drink and be merry. Enjoy life. Who has seen the next life. That's a dangerous philosophy. The understanding that I can be happy by gratifying the senses more and more and more is a wrong understanding. There's a difference between eating to live and living to eat. Living to eat is dangerous. Eating to live is understandable and is required. So there is some amount of sense gratification required to maintain this body, which is okay. That's why Krishna says one who eats too much or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough cannot be a yogi. But unfortunate thing in today's world is gratifying the senses has become the goal of life, has become the only source of our enjoyment and pleasure. So that is what is against the injunctions of scriptures. This question is from Virendra is sense gratification cause of human misery and how it can be lessened? Yes, it's a fact that sense gratification unlimited sense gratification is unlimited in the sense unrestricted sense gratification is a cause of misery and how it can be regulated? It can be regulated by if we have a source of pleasure, higher pleasure, higher taste. Krishna in the Gita says raso virjam rasopi asya param drishtwa nivartate vishaya vini vartante niraharasya dehina for a dehina for an embodied soul like us, we have a body, material body to restrict, to restrain from sense enjoyment is very difficult. That's why even people, when they want to lose weight, they go on a dieting for two days, three days, five days, one week, ten days they diet. But later on, because the senses are not in control, they again gain back that weight. So Vishaya vinivartante Nirahara said it's very difficult for an embodied soul to restrain by artificial repression, by force, from sense objects rasovarjam raso piasya param drishtwanivate but by experiencing a higher taste automatically taste for lower things fails off. That's why spirituality is so important. That's why spending quality time with the Lord in association with the Lord, understanding the instructions of the Lord is so important. The root cause of our misfortune is the ignorance, our forgetfulness of Lord. It may not appear so, but if we go and do the root cause analysis, okay, why I am miserable? You may say that I am in a very trying circumstances why I am in such trying circumstances? Because so and so is not good because so and so is creating problem in my life my boss is not good why it is like that? Why such circumstances? If you do root cause analysis, you will come to it's basically the ignorance avidya because of which we have engaged in wrong kind of activities engaged in activities which are sinful and because of which we have engaged in so many wrong karmic reactions which we have piled up and today we are in a deplorable circumstance. This question is from Lahari. Is it wrong to try for financial independence before graduation? There's nothing wrong to try we can always try but we should regulate just because we want it we should not overendevor somebody just like this we talked about this story of a person he says once the time is said then I will definitely find time and come. This can go on and on. Financial independence so long as we have greed will never be satisfied. We will want more. So whatever situation we may be in whatever circumstances we may be in, we try to regulate and start spending time in the spiritual dimension. This question is from Poonam Garg. From where does soul comes in clones? It's a good question. We have heard about Cloning. Cloning is where using some genetic reengineering through some genes they can create animals, let's say sheep identical, the same kind of looks, the same kind of fur. And that whole process of genetic modification is called process of Cloning. Yes. As science is progressing, we can fiddle around with material nature. Just like even there is lot of people now believing that this virus man has made it in a lab with all that playing around with virus and that RNA spike and all that protein spike whatever that virus all has been tinkered with. And today the world is in a very pitable situation. So man is trying to poke his fingers in different directions and a lot of effort is going in lot of research, lot of energy is being invested, lot of money is being invested. So Cloning is one such project. Yes, man can play around with the genes and create so called so called identically looking bodies. But finally Karmana daivana Jantur deha Utpatyate which soul will reside in that body? That Lord will decide. You can create a body by modifying the Jeems krishna also when you are so determined to fiddle around with material nature, krishna also allows okay, you want to do it, do it. Given us a free will. But finally, which soul will come and reside? That Lord is science. Karmana Daiwan Etrena suppose we produce an identical sheep with the kind of doing genetic. But finally what soul will reside in that body? Karmana Devanetrena Jantur deha Utpatyate krishna will decide. The Lord will decide. This question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. Why in Bhagavad gita Bhakti yoga is given priority over Karma yoga and Jnana yoga. Can you please give some comparative analysis as to why Krishna in the end asked Arjuna to abandon all yoga which he taught and surrendered to him only these all yoga systems Karma Yoga, Gnana Yoga are stepping stones to the ultimate end objective which is to surrender to the Lord. Yogi nam API sarve sham mad gatar antaratmana shraddhawan Bhajate Yomam samayuktamo Matah krishna says Yogi of all the Yogis he has talked about Karma Yogi, he's talked about Gyana Yogi astanga Yogi. And finally in the 6th chapter, Krishna is talking about the Bhakti Yogi. And then Krishna says yogi nam API Sarvesham of all the Yogis this is the question what you're asking. Yogi nam API Sarvesham madhgatar antaratmana one who's always thinking of me, who is absorbed in me. In other words, who is Krishna conscious a Bhakti yogi madhgatar antaratm shraddha Van Bhajate with shraddha with faith. Bhajate Yo Mam who is engaged in Bhajan Bhajate Yo Mam worships Me samay tamo matah. According to my Matah my opinion Krishna is saying he is the highest. So it is not fannitism just because we're talking more about Bhakti Yogi or we are propagating the cult of Bhakti as inunitiated by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. It is not that all other yoga system is so. It is leading to Karma yoga. Jnana Yoga. If a person follows this thing, then it will lead to surrender to the Lord which is nothing but Bhakti Yoga. Some more questions. Okay, leave it. What is Prarab Karma? This is from Virendra. What is Prarab Karma? And one's purva Sukruti karma, which brings him to perform bhakti. There are various categorization in which you can categorize Karma and all those things. But Bhakti predominantly speaking either we can over many many lives. Bahunam Janmanam Mante, gyanvan Mam Prapadhyante after many, many lives, we can progress through Gyana Yoga, through Karma Yoga and all those things eventually come to Vasudevam Sarvamiti. So that's one way of doing it and another way is if there's something called as causeless mercy. They are devotees of the Lord, representatives of the Lord who want to who are very compassionate who want to spread the good fortune and share the good fortune with others. And if we are also fortunate to come in touch with such devotees, associate with such devotees, then also our life can get completely transformed. We can also become fortunate. This question is from Rahul Kumar. I'm a bit new to Bhagavad Gita and Gita life and request you to kindly touch upon briefly on the process of chanting, we should implement. I can just briefly touch because there are many devotees who have been attending this session over many years. But nevertheless chanting since it's a very important aspect of our spiritual life, I can briefly touch many times. People wonder why we have to spend chanting more and more rounds. Prabhupada said that chant 16 rounds of Hare Krishna Mahamantra daily which approximately takes about 2 hours more. So in present world where there is so much of we all face shortage of time. We want to do so many things but we have limited time. And here we are saying invest 2 hours in chanting the Holy Names. Why? The principle is very, very simple and very logical. The Lord has descended in the form of his name. His name and the Lord are nondifferent. In other words, the chanting of the names which comes from our mouth although appears to be an ordinary sound vibration but out of the Lord's causeless mercy. That sound is not an ordinary sound. It's shakti Avesha nama. It is the empowered sound. A crude example, just like a piece of paper, a currency is not an ordinary piece of paper. It's an empowered piece of paper. That piece of paper authorized by the government is Rs1000 currency. So likewise. Kali kale nam Rup Avatar. The Lord has descended in the form of his name. Nam Namino abhinathwam the name of the Lord and the Lord are non different. So when I am attentively chanting the names of the Lord actually I'm associating with the Lord. I'm touching the Lord. The Lord who is reservoir of Sat Chit Ananda who is unlimited knowledge, unlimited fame, unlimited beauty, unlimited knowledge, unlimited wealth, unlimited Renunciation Shud Aishwarya Purnam I am coming in contact with such a personality. Just like the charge flows from higher level to a lower level just like when you place an iron rod in fire the iron rod also becomes fiery. It also becomes red hot. A time comes when that iron rod can act like fire. You touch that iron rod to a piece of paper, it can ignite fire. So likewise when we chant the names of the Lord give the attention to the Lord. We associate with the Lord. We put our soul in the fire of the manifestation of the Lord in the form of his name. The fire of Satchit Ananda the charge also flows into us. The Lord who is all pure the Lord who is reservoir of Satchit Ananda we also start experiencing Ananda that higher taste we also start experiencing Chit the knowledge transcendental knowledge. Ghana and Vijnana realized knowledge realization starts dawning on us. We start understanding that subject which otherwise Krishna says is confidential. We get spiritual strength. So that is the underlying thing why we chant. And the process is very simple. In our channel also we have many videos on how to chant. Why do we chant? We have a whole series on chanting. I request you to kindly watch those videos and I'm sure you'll get the required information. And there is a comment by Shubham Kumar who talks about the soulful Japa session. Yes, devotees should also go through those videos. They're very nice explaining very systematically and very elaborately the science of Japan. This question is from Yash Gangani. As the work is actually done by three modes of nature then what we do? What's our part in it? In where did Jeeva surrender to Krishna case and does not surrender case to? So the modes of material nature are influencing us prakrite Kriyamani, Gunai, Karamani Sarvashah but when we surrender to the Lord then we are freed from the influence of these lower modes. In other words, the soul who is in tamoguna because of purification will elevate and will predominantly be influenced by rajoguna. rajoguna is better than tamoguna and then the soul further gets purified will be predominantly influenced by Satvuna. And if we get further Purified we can also come to a state which is beyond Satoguna which is Shuddha Satva Vishuddha Satva and in that state we can be in touch, constant touch with the Supreme Lord. This question is from Ajay Raj Sharma. Why Bhagavad Gita is said to be confidential? When it is available easily, it is said to be confidential. Because just by reading by it's not like an ordinary book just by reading Gita or memorizing the verses, you can understand Gita. Krishna in the Gita also says the process which one has to follow to understand gita tadvidi pranipat upatekshanti teganam ganina satvadarshina to understand this bhagavad gita, this knowledge, one has to tat vidhi prani pathana. We have to surrender pariprashna. We have to inquire submissively. Like many of you attend the sessions and genuinely you're asking questions to understand the subject more thoroughly. Pariprashna and Sevaya render service to an exalted personality, a self realized soul. Seva is also very important component of our spiritual growth. Upadekshanti te gyanam that person will give you this transcendental knowledge, because he himself has seen the truth. Fortunately we are so blessed that we have Srila Prabhupada, who's a pure devotee of the Lord, who has so mercifully given us this pure knowledge in pure form, without adulteration. And if we take shelter of such a pure devotee, follow his instructions, then we'll be lucky. We'll be fortunate to receive this confidential.