Hare Krishna. A very warm welcome to all the devotees. Today we are going to discuss six principles of Satsang. Satsang is a word which is very widely known in our country, India. It means association with truth. Sat means truth and Sangha means association or association with devotees, association with God. So by satsang, our general understanding is that you hear some lectures or some discourses of God. So yes, that could be taken as the beginning of satsang. But the scriptures prescribe six principles by which we can actually take satsang and make progress in our spiritual life. So let us understand this very very important. The first stepping stone of spiritual life which is called Satsang. So this material world is called Dhavanal or Davagni. If you can avoid clicking that because it distract us. So this material world is called Dhavagni or Dhavanal. What does it mean? Dhava means forest and Agni means fire. Anal means fire. So we have so many fires. And the special nature of this Dhawagni or Dhavanal is that nobody goes into the forest to set fire. It happens automatically. That is a nature. There is wind and there is friction among the bamboo or the woods. And then automatically there is fire. So in this material world nobody strives to create problems. But there are always problems automatically. That is a nature. So that is why it is told Chaito dharpanamarjanam bhavamah DHA vagni nirvapanam. So when we chant the Hare Krishna Mahamantra, the first installment of this chanting is bhavamah DA vagni Nirvapanam. We get relief from this great blazing fire of material existence. And before that 1 may wonder that what has caused me to come to fall into this fire. It is fire. I understand. It is blazing. I am feeling the heat. So the understanding is ignorance. And how do we get ignorance? By associating with similarly ignorant living entities which is called Kusanga. So those living entities who are in ignorance like animals, animal will or an uneducated child would like to touch the fire. They get attracted by the glitter of the fire. So child sometimes want to touch the fire. Similarly we see the shastras give example of moth. The moth wants to willingly dash into the fire. Because the moth is very much attracted by the glitter. Oh, this is so nice. Let me go close and closer and eventually dashes into fire and loses its life. So the moth is ignorant, insignificant living entity and child is similarly ignorant. But this human form of life with the help of satsang we have an opportunity to extinguish this fire. So jumping into fire and coming out of fire both depend upon sangha or association. If you do Kusanga, just like how people develop bad habits people develop bad habits by bad association. Some friend would have told long back okay, let us enjoy the smoking. Let us enjoy drugs or some other bad habits and we'll enjoy. And then we got carried away by that association by birth nobody is born addicted to such habits but by bad association we develop bad habits and then we suffer from the resultant fire of such habits. So whatever desires we have in life all those desires are simply the result of bad habits bad association beg your pardon. And similarly if we want to culture good habits we have to have right association. And this wisdom we can develop only in this human form of life. That is why the great devotee poet Govindas Kaviraj has composed a very beautiful song bhajahur Sri Nandanandan Abhaya Charanar Vindare so we are all very very fearful now we are fearful this disease is striking us or some other problems can come and affect us. So a person in this material world is always very fearful and he finds no solution to come out of this fear. So the solution is so this called manashiksha. The teaching is being given to the mind bhajahurman. The devotee is writing. He's instructing the mind o my mind bhajahurman. Sri Nandanandan abhaya charanara vindere charan means lotus armin means lotus feet. Very, very beautiful feet Krishna has got. And any person who takes to the worship of lotus feet of Krishna he becomes fearless. So he is requesting my mind please worship engage yourself in the service of lotus feet of Krishna in that way you will become fearless. Duralabhumanawa Janamasatsangay Taroho Bhavasindhure so this material world another name is one name we discussed that is called Dhavanal another name is called Bhavasindhu sindhu means ocean. Ocean is very very great. No best of the swimmers also can cross ocean by their swimming capacity. So this ocean of material world is called Bhavasagar or Bhavasindhu. Bhava means to become here we keep on changing different forms although now there is no education system which teaches us but this is a fact if any person takes to research about subject matter of consciousness he will understand come to the conclusion that I am pure consciousness different from the body I am continuously changing my bodies. So here unlimitedly you keep on changing your bodies and along with changes of bodies come the concomitant stresses of birth, death, old age and disease and so many other problems. So just like to cross an ocean by swimming you cannot cross. You need a boat, a ship. So the association of devotees is compared to a very strong ship. If you are seated tightly on that ship then you can very easily cross over this great ocean of material nessians. So this Satsang is very powerful. So he's telling simply this human form of life is very very rare. It is like a boat like a ship which can take you across this ocean in no other forms you can cross this ocean. So this is very very durlab. Durlab means which is very rarely obtained in this human form of life taking advantage of satsang durlabhumana with Janama satsangay and then he further continues very beautifully SheetA Atapa Bhattabarishan Adhina Jamini Jagiray so in this life if you don't take shelter of devotee association then it is very very miserable. If you don't serve Krishna, then there are so many miseries. SheetA. SheetA means there is cold weather, and then there is summer. It is very, very hot. SheetA tapa bhattabarisha. Then there is wind, hurricane, tornadoes, and there is so much of rain and flood. And in this aid in a jamini jagiray. So he's explaining his fate situation that so long I have not done devotee association. I have not worshipped lotus feet of Krishna. So what is my fate? That I have been spending sleepless days and night suffering from extreme weathers, suffering from wind and suffering from rain? So we can see how in our country also we have seen there was strong attack of wind in URISA and so many people, they lost their lives and so much damage to property and keeps on happening in us. And so many other places also. And then there are floods now people are waiting when this corona disaster will go away. But then there was another disaster before this and people were waiting when will that go away? There were floods everywhere and every year floods they come and so many people they lose their lives. The army is supposed to be called and then the helicopters are there and people are being saved and this is a recurring phenomena. So in this way people are spending sleepless days and nights suffering from all these miseries. Now you may tell okay some people suffer but I am not suffering. So Prabhupada explains no suffering is there. To avoid that suffering you could have devised some other means just now you are hearing this krishna Katha Satsang we are delivering this thing we might not be affected by the scorching sun which is there outside in this season. Why? Because we have done some arrangement. We have got air conditioners, we have got air coolers or whatever some arrangement and we have got some nice house which protects us from rains and all such things but then it is being explained in order to maintain these arrangements again you have to undergo so much of misery. Now to maintain your air conditioner or whatever, you have to have electricity. Now for generating electricity what you have to do, you have to produce power plants and for that power plant you have to do rigorous ugar karma you have to go deep in the bottom of the ocean from there you take out oil and so many other things and then the ecology is disturbed. And then because of all these things there is global warming. So one tap you have avoided but global tap you have increased and then they are telling the whole world would be destroyed because of this tap so tap we have not avoided tap is there you avoid one tap, another tap will come another misery will come. Now you work in the Bombay high, work in another places and then again you are sleepless. Just to avoid some miseries of life. Human being has taken to some jobs and businesses. And those jobs and businesses have taken away whatever little sleep he was getting when he was tolerating these inconvenience of the nature having simple living and high thinking. So that is why it is told in the veda, the solution, the remedy of the misery is more miserable than the misery itself. So you have tried to solve these natural miseries. Govindas he is composing these prayers and the scorching sunlight and winters and all these things. So now we have got many advanced mechanisms. But what is the result of that mechanism? That sleeping pills are widely being consumed by people. People have become all the more sleepless. Whatever endeavors I have done in order to become comfortable that has taken my comfort away. So this is the nature of material world. So that is why what Govindas says it applies to everybody's life. We may not directly be suffering from these miseries but suffering we have shifted from one form to another. If there is so much load on the head sometimes I may think oh, let me shift the load on my shoulder or waist and then I feel relief. But this is illusion. The load has not gone. We have simply shifted it. So that is what is happening in the material world. Person is simply shifting the load to counteract one misery. He's taking another misery and rather in ignorance, not following the Vedic solutions, the guidelines given by God, he's increasing the misery. So he tells Adina jamini jagiray vifala sevinu kripana durjan chapala sukhalaba Lagira. And I have wasted my life uselessly in serving miserly and wicked men. And for what? For flickering happiness? For a fraction of happiness. Where is happiness in this material world? Just a fraction. You work hard day in and day out. Student is working very very hard. And sometimes if we get success in the examination many of them they don't get success. Some toppers in the class, they are successful only when there is little encouragement, some marks, some promotion. Then they feel oh happiness. But then again struggle is there. Similar is the case with business, with job and any other proceedings of this material world. There is just a fraction of happiness. Otherwise there is lot of labor. So he's lamenting that because of this ignorance of worldly men I have pursued all these moth like tendencies dashing into fire, chapal sukh just for fraction of happiness. I have wasted my life in serving, wasting my time, serving miserly and wicked men. So Govindas is telling somebody may question no, but there is happiness. There is happiness of wealth. I may get money, I'll become rich, I'll enjoy that money. And I will have some people around me. There are relatives, you can enjoy love with them. So next Govinda says Adhana yavan putra parijan itike paratitir kamala dalajal jivan talamal Bhajawaripadanitiri so what assurance of happiness is there? You are thinking if I get wealth, if I get loving family members, I'll become happy. But what is the assurance of happiness in your youth, in your wealth and in all your family members? Adhana yavan putra parijan Ithiki ache parathitiri so many people are there. Everyone. Almost 99.9% of people. They are working hard for wealth and they get wealth also many of them. And they get Putra and Parisian also they get relatives, they get children. But are they happy? No, happiness is not there despite that. So he's telling what is the assurance of happiness. And even if somebody tells no, I am happy. I am satisfied in my position. So Govindas next tells kamala Daljal Jeevan Talamal this life is like a drop of water tottering on the lotus petals. So if there is little wave of water or little small wind that drop of water rolls off the petal and gets merged into the lake. In a similar fashion our bodies have emerged out of this nature. It's like a bubble and it will vanish anytime, anytime it can happen. And that is what is happening now around the world that we can see. Kamala Daljal Jeevana Talmal so our life is based on a very shaky platform. It's like drop of water tottering platform drop of water which is shaking on the lotus petal anytime it rolls back and finished. So that is why Govindas tells what is the remedy in the association of devotees? Shavanakirtan smaradamandan pada sevana dasyare Pujana Sakijan atmanivedan govinda das Abhilashare is telling Shavana Kirtan smarana vandan Shavan. Hearing about Krishna kirtan chanting about Krishna glorifying krishna preaching about Krishna smaran thinking about Krishna vandan. Offering prayers to Krishna Padha. Sevan serving the lotus seat of Krishna dasyre becoming Krishna's servant poojan worshipping Krishna with all the paraphernalia. Sakhijan serving Krishna in the capacity of a friend. These are the desires. Govindadas Abhilashare Atmanivedan offering myself completely to Krishna. My mind, body, intelligence, my possessions whatever I have all these things I wish to offer to Krishna now this is my only desire. I have seen enough of this material world. So many miseries are there. I try to counteract the misery. The miseries only increase and I work very very hard to please miserly and wicked men who are only interested in their own satisfaction. And what I get in result is fraction of happiness. And my heart wants unlimited happiness. And moreover I have got some possessions. I may be young and I could be enjoying with my nice family members and I might be having wealth. But there is no assurance of happiness after gaining all these things. And this life is temporary. Even though I may be happy now anytime this happiness will go away or my life will go away. So that is why I take to the platform of Krishna consciousness the way to reach eternal happiness and that is Shavanakirtansmaradamandan Padha Savan Dasiri chanting, hearing, worshipping and these nine processes of devotional service and how these processes have to be executed Govindasi is explaining Duralabhamana Janama satsangay in satsanga in the association of devotees. Just like with wrong association, we develop wrong desires. In right association, we can develop right desires. So this desire to serve Krishna can only be nurtured, can only be relished matured in the association of devotees satsang. So how to take this satsang? This satsang is so glorious it is told if you associate with Sadhus even for a fraction of moment your life can become successful. So Prabhupada gives a very nice story how a fraction of moment practically it has brought a turnaround in the life of devotees. So there was one thief and somehow this thief stumbled across a satsang which was happening Krishna Katha. And then he was hearing the speaker was giving the description that Krishna this is the pastime of Krishna that he comes out of his house every day and he tends the cows with the cows he is roaming in the jungles. And when Krishna has come then Krishna is very nicely decorated in very costly beautiful jewels and ornaments by Mother Yashoda. And the ornaments are so beautiful they become even more beautiful in the body of Krishna. So when he was hearing the thief thought oh, such a boy like Krishna comes every day to this forest and he's having all such jewelry. He's a small boy, a kid so very easily I can rob him of his possessions and will become very rich. So then he became very eager. Oh, he has given description in this Vrindavan krishna is going to come so let me go. And with great eagerness he was waiting when Krishna would come when Krishna would come, every day Krishna comes he was convinced today also will come. So this eagerness, it is told in the Shastras is the only price we have to pay to see Krishna to attain Krishna consciousness. Katar Lalia Mapi Mulia Mekalam Janmakoti Sukritar Nalabhyate you keep on doing charity, keep on doing Vrata Japa, Tapasya but unless we develop this eagerness Krishna cannot be understood, cannot be seen. So somehow he became very eager. Oh, I want to very eager because he was although the motive was not right, it does not matter somehow his devotee is very eager. Just like Maharaj Dhru Maharaj was very eager I want to have a better kingdom even than Lord Brahma. And he was very eager to see Krishna because he was knowing only Krishna can give such an arrangement. So Dhru Maharaj, even though he was having material desires he was able to see Krishna. So whether a person is having right motive or wrong motive of course we should not have wrong motives. Because we are educated, we are sane, we understand. Let me not do any business and bother God. God is my father he knows what is good for me. Let me just try to please him. But even if we have got very very bad kusanga wrong association we have very strong material desires. Even for that a person is recommended t Virena bhakti yogena engage very very sincerely in intense Bhakti yoga. And then this eagerness will come. Just like a person who is sick he does not have eagerness to consume food. But if that person is given proper treatment he sticks to the procedure. His sickness will go away. He will be eager to eat. So we are very eager to see Krishna automatically. If you purify yourself in the association of devotees follow sadhana seva nicely. This eagerness comes and then we are able to understand and see Krishna. So he became very very eager to see Krishna. And then Krishna actually came because he was eager. And then when he saw Krishna he somehow wanted to steal his jewelry ornaments. But this is another nature of Krishna consciousness. Because Krishna is Supremely Pure. With good motive or bad motive somehow you come in contact with Krishna you become completely purified. So although his intention was to steal Krishna's ornaments but by association of Krishna he became completely purified. And then he became a pure devotee surrendered to Krishna. He no longer was desiring to take the ornaments of Krishna. And how this change of heart happened? It happened because just somehow he heard in the association of devotees that Krishna comes. So that is why Prabhupada. So read the scriptures every day very nicely with great attention. And one instruction will enter your heart and it will make a difference of day and night in your spiritual life. So we have to just very patiently follow all the rules and regulations. And then when this sangha happens, this divine association happens. It brings the change of day and it makes a difference of day and night in one spiritual life. We have to wait for that depravatis patiently keep on following the rules and regulations very very nicely in the association of devotees. And suddenly one day we will see all perfection in our life. All spiritual perfection would be there. So satsang is very much glorified. Even a fraction of satsang is very nice. But then how to have this satsang? To have this satsang properly. The Vedas describe Srila Rup Goswami describes in Nectar of Instruction. I hope some of you would have started reading the book we discussed in the previous session. Also the six principles which destroy Bhakti. Six principles which enhance Bhakti. And now this session is also based on Nectar of Instruction. So today's session is based on verse number four where six principles of association are described. Now what is association? Some people think and people have this understanding. Or if I simply keep on meeting devotees then my life would be successful. I am roaming around spending time with devotees. Then this is what vedas are telling. I'll become successful and they may discuss all sorts of mundane talks, politics and XYZ and household talks with their devotees. So this is not satsang. So Prabhupada just like the bug is also sitting on the lap of the king or the bug is sitting on the spiritual master. Is he taking the association of spiritual master? No, he is simply sucking blood from spiritual master in a similar fashion. Simply physically roaming around with the devotees. That is not satsang. So Satsang means association means developing love for the devotees. So how to develop love, how to develop priti. So there are six symptoms of this association or love which are mentioned in this way we should try to take satsung. So the first symptom is Dadati. What is the meaning of dadati? Dadati means to offer give charity. So just like in an ordinary relationship also if you have a business meeting then you exchange some gifts. You give some presents, you accept some presents and then you go out. You fix a lunch, a meal, something somewhere and then you eat together. So the same thing applies in spiritual life also it begins with giving something dadi, now what do you give? Charity should be done for the devotees and how charity should be done. So it is being explained. Charity can be done in four ways pranay, Arthur, Diya and Vaja. The greatest charity is offering one's life. So a person who is sincere in spiritual life he can dedicate his life completely in the service of the spiritual master. This is the best dadati best charity. Offer your life in the service and somehow if you are not able to do offer your life then whatever little time you have. Oh I have many responsibilities. I cannot surrender myself full time to devotees, to spiritual master. Then whatever time we have in life sometime we should take out and that we can give. But our life force, our energy should be engaged. This can be offered as gift. Gift could be of services, gift could be something tangible. And second way of doing charity is earth hire. Now why I am not able to offer my life because I have some other engagements. I have my job, my business XYZ by which I make some money. So it does not matter. You are working somewhere, you are producing money out of it. So that money can be offered to the devotees. And of course devotees do not need any money for personal enjoyment. But everything is being used in the service of Krishna. So this arthair is also very very important. And an advanced devotee is supposed to practice giving 50% of his income. Those who are brahmachari, they should offer everything and those who are grastas because there are family responsibilities. So all those responsibilities should be taken care in 50% of one's wealth. Then a person would be happy materially and he would make his spiritual life also perfect. He will be relishing the ecstasy of spiritual life he will be having the consciousness of a sanyasi. So 50% principle. Oh how I can follow. Maybe when I become rich then progressively I will increase my charity and then I will start doing it. No, it is mentioned if you read that nectar of instruction whatever one's income may be 50% should be done in the service of Krishna. If you want to actually experience an advanced platform of spiritual life and we can understand from the lives of great devotees. Also there was a very advanced devotee. Sridhar. Pandit kola vecha sridhar. Also he was called So kola vecha Sridhar. He was called Kola Vecha because his business was menial job he was doing of making cups out of banana leaves and selling those things. Now how much money you would earn by that very small ordinary business. So he was a very poor person sending banana cups and he was not having a good living condition. Also one small hut he was having and the roof was also having many many holes. His vessels were also broken, not in proper shape. So when the devotees visited him and they offered to do some help so he's telling oh you are telling. I am uncomfortable. See the birds. The birds do not have any roof over them. At least I have a sum roof with holes. Why you are seeing the holes? See that I have some roof at least. So please do not try to give me any favor. I am already favored by God. So he was so poor that his roof was having holes. But still whatever money he was earning by the small business he was spending 50% in devotional service. So just like to give you a practical example a person can be poor and suppose now many people need so much money for the treatment. If a person is poor, can you tell the government that let me not give tax because my family members have fallen sick. It is not possible. Tax has to be given and then from the balance income you take care. Because ultimately we have to understand happiness and distress will come to us as per our destiny. The whole world is planning our own satisfaction and the result is the stress. Depression is only increasing because we don't understand. We are unsure of Krishna just like finger is unsure of the body. So the real science of self satisfaction is you simply plan the satisfaction of Krishna and then you would be satisfied. So thus we see kola Vichar is full of ecstasy, full of bliss because he's simply planning satisfaction of Krishna. Krishna has laid down some principles and this is one principle that Krishna does not want anything. But when you offer your wealth to Krishna krishna then relationship between us and Krishna develops and that is what actually satisfies the living entity. So whatever one's situation may be eventually yes, I understand. It may be difficult in the beginning but eventually we should aspire one day I should reach this platform of Dadati. So by this Dadati principle is executed pranayar by spending one's life force dedicating one's life or arthair by spending one's hardened money in the service of Krishna. Or there is another faculty that we have and that is Dhya. A person can have intelligence. So intelligence also should be offered in the service of Krishna. What is Krishna's service? Krishna's best services. Krishna declares in Bhagavad gita spreading this message to others. Just because of ignorance of this knowledge people are suffering. So if you use your intelligence in spreading this sankirtan mission so it is mentioned in the nectar of instruction. This comes under the principle of Dadati. You engage yourself in preaching mission. You engage your intelligence and vaja. We all have got capacity to speak. So anyway we are preaching. Now we are preaching or this government is bad. They did not block this thing and that thing so something is happening. This government is good and like this we are anyway doing preaching. This is good and this is bad. We are anyway preaching or this movie was very bad. Do not watch it. This movie is very good. This restaurant is not good. This restaurant is very good. So anyway preaching we are doing what is good and what is bad. But we have to understand all this good and bad is not going to help people bad government. How muchEVER we criticize it will be put into place if we are sinful. This is all Krishna's arrangement. If a person commits crime an arrangement will be made by which he is supposed to be hanged till death. In a similar fashion how much ever we keep on discussing if we don't become obedient to the laws of nature we keep on encroaching giving trouble to other living entities. We are not satisfied with our life. We are killing animals just for satisfaction of our tongue. At least animal has got right over its life. But we are killing animals for my satisfaction. So nature will kill us also in the same way animals are killed. So we should not tell why God is not protecting. How Krishna will save. No this arrangement is done by God only. You are encroaching upon their life. So your life also will not be stable. It will be taken away. So this preaching we can do rather than preaching about mundane affairs which anywhere under control of nature kalyuga all these calamities have to happen Satyuga peacefulness has to happen. This cycle will keep on happening. So our speaking potency should be engaged in telling people. Bhajahu rayman sri Nandanandan. O my mind. O my devotee please engage. My dear fellow men citizens please engage your minds in serving the lotus feet of Krishna. This human form of life is very rare. Don't become a moth and get carried away by glitter of this material world. Oh wine is there. Sex is. There and comforts are there. Music is there. These are all glitters. Just like fire is glittering. When you actually enter into these activities you see the whole world is into these activities. But there is suffering also which is ever increasing. So preach like this. Simply read and preach. Repeat the instructions. By this watcha we can use our tongue. Or this much intelligence is also not there. Simply we can tell people. People are very dull. They will not be able to appreciate the philosophy. Tell them simple thing. You are chanting so many names. You call and you speak. Hi. Suresh. How are you? Hi, Rishi. How are you? Hi, Garima. How are you? You're calling your friends so you can chant the name of Krishna, isn't it? Anyway you are taking so many names in the day. So please practice this principle. Chant. Hare Krishna hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna hare Hare Hare Ram hare Ram, Ram Ram Hari Hare so no, no, my mind does not focus. I cannot sit and do any way. You are walking. By walking you can chant anytime. Your tongue is free. You experiment this thing and you experience spiritual pleasure. By this thing automatically everything will come in this way. We can use arvacha for charity. So in these four ways every person is supposed to do charity. Offer one's life, offer one's wealth. Pranaya earthhair. Offer one's intelligence and vaja offer one's speech. This is the principle of dadati which is very important. Without this dadati without offering if we hear yes it is good but much advancement is not going to happen. And then hearing will become hacknid after some time burdensome. And that hearing also will stop. Hearing will not fructify, will not enter our heart. So this dadi pranayara. The Vaja is first principle of Satsang preeti Lakshanam loving exchange. And then second is Prati grahanathi. In this way when we offer charity money services to the devotees they will offer something in exchange. The devotees can offer us some books, some literature, some instructions. They can tell us please why don't you live in the temple? Come and stay in the guest house. Spend your weekend. So those things should be accepted. Some gifts they can give you chanting Bag or XYZ. So accept the gifts from the devotees. Softer the gifts and then accept from them. Dadati prati grahanathi. Next important principle is Goyam akhyatam. Prachati, Guhia means confidential. Akhyatam means you should reveal. You should speak your mind. So suppose you are not able to understand the philosophy then don't think oh, this is not right. Reveal your mind. Prabhu, I think in this way how to understand it revealing. And you might be having some difficulty in life which you think is very great. I cannot follow Krishna consciousness. I am very lusty. I am just a fallen person. I have so many bad habits. I cannot come out of it. No, don't think you think. It is a very big problem. We have seen in the history those people who were number one devotees became number one devotees. As we discussed previously, Ramayan was composed by a person who was a decoy. And he was giving so many atrocities to people. And he became composer of Ramayan, a pure devotee. So the greatest of the fallen souls Jagai Madhai who were torturing the living entities and violating the women and all such tasks they were doing. And they became pure devotees experiencing extraordinary spiritual pleasures in the service of Krishna. So all that can be done. But Maya illusory energy it will put all these doubts in the mind. Oh, you cannot follow Krishna consciousness. It is not for you. You are hopeless case. So please Guhyam Akhyatam, reveal your mind. Revealing one's mind in confidence to the devotees. It is very important element of devotional service. So one senior devotee one or two years ago he visited our Mumbai center. So we were requesting him that Maharaj, can you please share some realizations, some practical principles which we should apply which a devotee can get trapped in. So Maharaj explained never struggle alone. So many times we are struggling alone in spiritual life. And this is not the principle. And Bharat Maharaj who was on the 8th stage of devotional service he was so advanced in devotional service. Although he was emperor of the whole world. That is why the planet was called Bharatvarsh. Before he was ruler of entire planet. He was so advanced. He left all his kingdom, wealth, family, everything at the age of 24 years to engage himself in devotional service. But somehow he got attached to a deer. And when he was not able to control his attachment he was having this complexity in his life. He did not consult a spiritual master. So he fell down from spiritual life and became animal dear in the next life. So revealing one's mind it is very very important element of devotional service. So whatever difficulty is there, it should be revealed. And then Goyam akhyatam Prichati And then one should inquire then how to come out of it? What is Krishna, how to solve the problems of life? Just like Sanatan Goswami. Although Sanatan Goswami is on liberated platform but when he met Chathana Mahaprabhu he is repeating the statement that people call me. You are a very learned man. Gramya vyavari pandita korimani. People tell that oh, you are a very nice man. You are very learned. Apanar hitahita kichunaijani. But I know, I do not know what is good for me, what is bad for me. So please instruct me, why am I suffering? Because if I know what is good for me then I should not suffer in life, isn't it? But despite having all the knowledge suffering is still there in my life. It means I do not know what is good for me. That knowing what people think I am very wise. I know what is good for us. We will have this vaccine and we will have this nice strong security system. We will have a dog also so that there is no robbery in the house. And I will have very nice family members. They will give me so much of pleasure. And I think oh yes, this is my knowledge. I know how to become happy in this world. But then sir, you are not happy. It means you do not know what is good for you and what is bad for you. These very things the Bhagavatam explains one's possessions if not used in the service of God and other living entities become the very source of misery for the living entity. So I do not know they should not be engaged for my service but in the service of God and other living entities. So Sanatan goswami tells because I am suffering. This is a proof. I do not know what is good and bad for me. K AMI so please help me explain who am I? Who is changing all these bodies? Kene amai jari Tapatroy. Why am I burning with these threefold miseries? Everything is under control of God. Why these miseries are inflicted upon me? So in this way we should inquire guhiyam Akyati Prichyati reveal your mind and inquire from the devotees. Take instructions from them. So whatever knowledge they give whatever instructions they give we should implement in our life. So these are the third and fourth principles. The Dhati give to them services, gifts. Accept from them gifts whatever they offer. Reveal your mind and then ask from them confidentially the most confidential knowledge. Don't ask from devotees. So what you were liking before you became devotee? Which school did you go and which bike you were riding on? Many times people ask such questions. So devotee may tell or may not tell. And he will not tell the thing. Understanding this person is not at all interested, not willing to understand. So devotees should be asked the most confidential knowledge. What is most confidential knowledge that Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita nine chapter. And then at the end of Bhagavad Gita 18 chapter mana Bhavamad Bhakto madhyaji Mam Namaskaru mana think of me. So the most confidential knowledge topmost knowledge which can solve all the problems of life. Krishna tells this is the topmost knowledge. Mana simply think of me. So your mind anyway has got thinking capacity. It is thinking about some people or some property, some business affairs or your pets, cats and dogs, horses, camels. So engage this mind. Rather than thinking of all these living entity or property or business transactions engage itself in thinking of Krishna manmana bhavmad Bhakto become Krishna's devotee. Now I'm devotee of my senses. My eyes are telling okay, show me next video and I am devoted. Yes my eyes please watch next video. Eyes will demand please show me one more video. And I am telling yes, I am completely your devotee. I will show you one more video. Tongue will tell. Order more food from Zomato. Yes, immediately I am ordering. So I am completely devoted to my senses. Completely devoted to so many things. So the confidential knowledge is now try to become devotee of Krishna. Try to follow simple instructions of Krishna. Madhyaji. Offer respects to Krishna. You offer respect to so many living entities. You offer respect to a goon who may come to take ransom from you. You offer respects to some policemen, some traffic police. You offer respects to elderly people. So experiment, just experiment offering respects to Krishna. And then you see the result. Mam Namaskaru offer your obeisances unto me. So this is the most confidential knowledge which people do not know. Simply by thinking of Krishna becoming devotee of Krishna, offering Him respects I can solve all the problems of my life. So this confidential knowledge we should ask from the devotees how can I think of Krishna? How to engage in devotional service of Krishna? And then devotees will explain the process. Shavanam Kiritana Vishnu as per our capacity, as per our inclinations devotee, expert, spiritual master. He knows how to engage this person in becoming devotee. Not everyone can follow the same process. Just like Valmiki, it was impossible for him to chant even the name of Ram which we are supposed to do. But Narad Muni being very expert, he gave him the process. Okay. You chant Mara. And by chanting Mara He became most exalted pure devotee. In a similar fashion, Rigari, another hunter he was given simple instruction. You go there, worship Tulsi and chant the names of Krishna. That's it. Just do these two activities. What about my food? No, you don't worry about it. Everything will be arranged. You just follow these two things. Worship Tulsi Maharani every day and chant the names of Krishna. So somehow he developed faith in Naradmani. And then Naradi told the village see that hunter, he has become a devotee. So villagers oh, he has become devotee. Let us go and have darshan of devotees. And people were knowing these six principles before. So when they would go to devotees they would obviously go with some gifts. So they would take all the food items. So earlier he was struggling to have little food stock. Now he's having abundance. Now what to do? So there was only one solution. You have to distribute. So he offered and he started distributing. In this way he became very very advanced devotee, pure devotee of Krishna. So thus how to engage in this Mana Bhavad Bhakto devotional service of Krishna? That devotees will tell. So this is what we should ask from the devotees reveal your mind, don't struggle alone. And ask from the devotees how to engage in devotional service. And then Bhungte Bhojate Chaiva last but not the least offering the devotees Prasadam of Krishna. So wherever the devotees go and honor prasadam that place becomes purified. The house becomes purified. It is told in Bhagavatam Krishna is telling I do not get much satisfaction from the foodstuffs that are offered in the sacrificial fire in the Yajna Kunda in Yajna you are supposed to offer tons of ghee, grains and so many other things. But I don't get much satisfied than the offering which is made through the mouth of the brahmanas. If somebody offers brahmanas very nice foodstuffs which are cooked in ghee I get much more satisfaction than when the food stuff or ghee is directly poured in the Yajnakunda sacrificial fire. So offering devotees Krishna prasadam is very very favorable devotional activity. And the person who offers food, he becomes purified. The place becomes purified, entire house becomes purified. And then the devotees also offer prasadam. Just like in all our centers on every weekend, Saturday, Sunday we distribute prasadam and where we have temples continuously. As long as the temple is open we continue prasadam distribution as much as you want. Please come and take. So that should be accepted. So prasadam should be accepted from the devotees. And we should also invite the devotees to take prasadam at our place. So this prasadam is very very important. So these associations should be done only with the devotees. So with materialist if you do this thing then it is told vishayera anakhaile Malina haymana if you do this exchange invite materialist to give him food to your place. Or you go to materialist place and you take food from him then malina haya mana the mind becomes dushta malina. It becomes contaminated, it becomes lusty, it becomes greedy. And all such material desire person will become mad. Start acting like moth. We would like to dash into this dhavanal, jump into this fire. So that is why we should be very very careful. Yes. As a gentleman we should talk to everybody. But these intimate preeti Lakshanam these principles should be applied with devotees. So very simple process. Dadati prati Granati. You offer your gifts services in the form of life, in the form of wealth, in the form of intelligence, in the form of speech to devotees. And then devotees give some gift. You accept from them. You reveal your mind, take their help and then ask about the devotional service of Krishna. How to engage, please give me service. And then invite the devotees to offer foodstuffs. And whatever foodstuffs devotee offer as prasadam we have to accept. These are shadvidham, preeti Lakshanam, the six symptoms of love or the real association. So in this way we have to do satsang. So these principles devotees are usually not aware of and they think satsang means simply if I go once in a week and I hear that is okay, that is the beginning. But that is not all right. So in these six principles if we apply ourselves nicely then you see how fast growth will be. And we will very soon experience increasing pleasure in Krishna consciousness. So with this I would like to end now. We have very nice bhajan for you. So ten minutes do this Shavanam Kirtanam now we can have virtual association. Just try to hear each and every word of the mantra very nicely and then sing along with it. Just become completely absorbed in it. And after that we will take up questions. If anyone has hari krishna hari krishna krishna krishna garam hari ram ram ram hari krishna krishna krishna hari ram krishna krishna hari hari ram hari ram hari krishna krishna krishna hari hari hari rama hari ram ram rama hari hari krishna hari ram krishna krishnande ram ram hari krishna hari krishna krishna krishna hari nadi hari ram Ram. Ramnande Hari ram Hari krishna Hari krishna krishna Krishna Hari Hari. Hari Ram. Hari Ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari krishna hari krishna krishna krishna Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari Ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hare Krishna I hope all of you enjoyed this kirtan. So this is very simple. Every morning evening do kirtan invite your family members neighbors. In this way we can increase the number of devotees. All of you can start posting your questions. Already we have got some questions. So this is from BBC Family Entertainment. There is no temple near me. How can I associate with devotees? So we all should have temple in our own house. So what is temple where Krishna is worshipped in a regulated fashion. So have deity of Krishna over there and you do the offerings as we discussed. It is very simple. Whatever you want to eat, you just put there for a few minutes with tulsi leaf and then you take out at least milk, fruits few basic things we can offer if you cannot cook as of now. So in this way try to make your house a temple. Every house should be a temple. Now the question is of devotee association. So I think we have posted in the chat one email ID on that you can contact and devotees will connect you to other devotees around your place. This from Ajay Rasharma. Why? Krishna in Bhagavad Gita teaches all kinds of yoga to Arjun. If in the end he tells him to forget, abandon everything and surrender to him alone what does actual surrender really mean? So Krishna explains to Arjuna gradually Prabhupada explains so that Arjuna may not misunderstand. So direct process is Saradharman parityA JAMA may come sharadam Raja Manmana Bhamad Bhakto krishna explains this is the most confidential thing. But gradually Krishna is explaining and another reason for this is just to explain the superiority of Bhakti yoga that even though Arjuna is being recommended all these processes and he is recommended the Dhyani yoga process and Arjuna rejects. So this is not possible. So for comparative analysis and also because Arjuna is representing a common man they cannot digest the most confidential instruction immediately. So that is why Krishna gradually builds up and all this knowledge is also important. Prabhupada explains so that we can engage in the service of Krishna and another question is what does actual surrender really mean? So this is also very nice question. We'll have a session on this in future on six principles of surrender. So this six is also very nice. Number six principles of Bhakti. Destroy Bhakti. Satsanga. And there are six principles of association. Six principles of surrender. So in brief if I tell you surrender means just like postal surrender, hands up criminal and criminal surrenders means whatever you are saying, I'm willing to follow. So when a person is completely willing to follow the instructions given by Krishna or spiritual master, that is called surrender. But there are six principles for it that we will discuss in session in detail. This is from Puna Maheshwari. Question is how to perform Krishna consciousness while doing Grihasta duties. So Krishna consciousness as we discussed it is simple. The dhati prati Granati goyamakyati prachati bhungte bhojate Chaiva these things Agrasta can do very nicely. And shravanam kirtana vishnu savannah So Krishna consciousness is so nicely that anybody can do so the same things everyone whatever is meant for Sanyasi is meant for Brahmachari. For Van Prasta. Same thing is meant for Grasta. Also Grasta has to do one additional item which Brahmachari or Van Prasta or Sanyasi is not supposed to do. So every Astram has got some unique responsibility. So Grasta has got unique responsibility of doing charity. Bhagavatam mentions the glory of Grasta is known by the charity he's does, sanyasi is known by the tapasya he does and Brahmachary is known by the Yajnahidas. So in Grasta we have an extra thing that is the wealth and that should be used in the service of Krishna along with all the other procedures of Seva Sadhana Shamanam Kirtanam Vishnu chanting, hearing, thinking of Krishna, worshipping his lotus feet, offering prayers same principles. Next question is from Lehri Prabhuji. When we interact with materialistic people our mind becomes more conditioned. Consciousness gets disturbed. What is the best thing that we can do to rebound our consciousness? So first instruction is that do not associate. Yes we have to meet them but that we understood today is not association. Association means these six exchanges Shadvir Preeti Lakshanam should not happen with them. Meeting, talking and formalities we have to do that is all right. As much as requirement is there, to that extent we should do it. And still sometimes our consciousness may get affected. So that is why immediately associate with devotees and associate with Krishna. Chant the names of Krishna, hear Krishna Katha now we have very nice. All lectures of Srila Prabhupada are available. Start hearing Prabhupada's lecture immediately or watch his video or chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra or go out for book distribution. Start preaching in this way immediately. The quickest means is chanting and hearing attentively Hare Krishna Mahamantra either in the form of Japa or Kirtan. And very quickly we can come to spiritual platform. So try to practice this. Next is from Ashwin Srinivasan Hare Krishna Prabhu can you please summarize all the points on six principles of Sasang we discussed today? I think I summarized two three times in session itself. So what you can do is Nectar of Instruction book. We will share the link of the PDF. You can kindly visit it or you can visit Prabhupadbooks.com website or Prabhupada IO. In that all the books of Srila Prabhupada you'll get Prabhupad IO Prabhupadbooks.com. And there you search. Nectar of instruction. Fourth verse you will get in detail whatever discussion we have done in the purport as well as the verses the Shloka. And we are sharing the link also. There you can get complete summary. Next is from Ajay Rash Sharma. Sometimes our faith in God shakes when we go through difficult times like COVID. How to strengthen our faith in testing times. Yes. So if we do not have nice devotee association complete knowledge of Krishna consciousness or even sufficient knowledge is not there then we can lose our faith. So that is called Neophyte stage. Neophyte means that is again mentioned. Nectar of instruction. Next verse. Verse number five. So now we have discussed to associate with devotees. Now there are various grades of devotees. How to identify that grade? So that is mentioned. So over there it is mentioned that the first grade of devotee is called Neophyte where Shraddha is very common. So anytime just like a child if he goes outside any loss can happen. Somebody can kidnap or accident can happen. In similar fashion in any accident a devotee can lose his faith so very quickly he should try to rise to the platform of Madhya Madhikari intermediate devotee. So my suggestion is very sincerely. Try to follow in advance to intermediate level of spiritual life. And meanwhile rigorously try to chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra and read the books. And please associate reveal your doubts to the devotees. Now when seeing COVID situation or any other situation so on one side we are seeing that oh we are suffering. God is not there. But why don't you see the other side? The situation in the womb of the mother you could not even ask for food or water or air. You are unconscious for seven months. And even though we are conscious after that we cannot ask. But the right amount of food, the right amount of water, the right amount of air supplied by God to us. And even now when we are living here the right amount of radiation, the ozone layer, the right temperature, the right food, the right CO2 oxygen everything is being maintained so nicely by God. So why don't you see how God is maintaining nicely at every moment? Yes some miseries are coming in between. That is because of my bad karma. Krishna is so nice. Just even a thief just by touching Krishna, coming in contact became purified of all wrong habits. How Krishna can be wrongdoer? So this is happening. All this COVID crisis just like seeing the criminals. A person should not become faithless on the government. Criminals are made to suffer by the government because they encroach upon others. So we as a civilization we are involved in so much of animal killing and other violations, abortions and so many things. So these things are very natural and even more serious catastrophes are going to come. We just have to wait. So need not lose faith in Krishna understand? This is divine justice being meted out perfectly as per the karma done by people. Next is by Rahul Prajapat Hare Krishna Prabhu if a devotee is suffering from some disease and don't have enough money for treatment so he must simply depend on Krishna or he should struggle to earn money for no never struggle very much for maintaining body and soul together regulated endeavor should be done. So what is the harm? Ultimately body we will lose we'll get another body. This body you lose. Following the principles of Krishna consciousness is just like changing of dress. Anyway one day we have to die. So that is why in Bhagavad Gita in the very beginning there's the first instruction given to Arjuna one of the first instructions second chapter verse number 13 dehinu as manyati this is the symptom of a sober man, wise man that by change of bodies he is not at all disturbed. So that is why we should not be worried about death and all it is simply change of body. Why work so hard? Save always time for Krishna consciousness. In that try to save yourself. Otherwise chant the names of Krishna and die and there would be no more material body if we remember Krishna perfectly at the time of death. Next question is by Pratik Shet how to attain Moksha? So moksha is not very desirable thing. There is the special feature of Bhakti bhakti Moksha laghutakrit so Bhakti diminishes Moksha and actually for a devotee Moksha is like hell. Kavalyam Narayate tridash Push akash Push Payate so this Moksha is a situation it's like a person was suffering in the jail. From jail he has come out and he's lying on the road. So that is not a very nice situation. The best situation he goes back to his family, resumes his occupation and has a nice comfortable life. So Moksha is like we have come out of material world but we have just merged in the spiritual effulgence brahma jyoti that is not very pleasant situation for the soul. Because soul by nature is active it wants to engage in the service of Krishna. So that is why it is told by the devotees mukti Mukulitan jali sevate asman Mukti with folded hands is willing to engage in the service of Krishna but devotees reject Mukti so Mukti is automatic to the devotee. If a person is out of jail with his family, automatically he is liberated. Why you just desire I want to come out of jail desire I want with my family. So devotee desires to go to Krishna on his planet and engage in loving services to Krishna and automatically he is liberated. So Moksha is not desired by the devotees. Even enemies of Krishna attain Moksha. So why a devotee would desire a place where enemies of Krishna go. So desire Bhakti not Moksha hari Krishna prabhuji, I'm not able to get up early in the morning and chant my 16 rounds because of some medicines. This is some mind medicines. So please help and reply. So try to sleep early because anyway the sleeping time would be fixed. So if you sleep early even with medicines you'll be able to get up early. And even though it is not possible to get up as early because of your medical conditions whenever you get up then you try to chant. Krishna understands our situation. Next question is from Rachna M purohit Hare Krishna. Prabhuji, can we have desires to earn money so that we can utilize for Krishna's service? Yes, this very nice desire. This is what we should desire. So that is why having desire for money is not bad. Prabhupada, earn as much money as possible and then engage in Krishna's service. This is very good. Please do that but not compromising the Sadhana and Seva. So this should be kept in mind. Next question is from Sahil Sharma Hare Krishna. Prabhu, whom should I donate to devotees or to a person who is admitted in hospital and need money to survive and why? Very good question. By so this many people ask especially in the initial stages that should I give to devotees or should I donate to person who is suffering in hospital. So if you give money to a person who's suffering in hospital then what will happen? He can maybe postpone his death and he can come out of maybe that disease for a while. But can we stop diseases by giving money in such a manner? No. Can we stop death? No. But if we give money to the devotees, the devotees are spreading Krishna consciousness. By this all the diseases and death will stop completely. So that is why charity. If you see in the Vedic culture was done to the Brahmanas and Vaishnavas and you may tell if a person is not having fit body then how can he engage in service of Krishna? So that Vaishnavas will take care. So all the money is interested to the Brahmanas and devotees and then they arrange for charity. How to give charity? How much money should be spent in which fashion so that devotees can advance in Krishna consciousness. People can advance in Krishna consciousness and permanently solve the problems of birth, death, old age and disease. So this eternal life nobody can give but the devotees. So that is why charity scripture still should be done to the devotees. However if a person does not have this understanding at least give to hospital and somewhere some other things so that your heart becomes. Purified. But if a person has proper understanding this thing krishna very nicely explains in the twelveTH chapter of Bhagavad Gita if you cannot do this, do this, cannot do this, do this. So those who have understanding oh. He is giving eternal life. So that is why they should be given charity. Next question is by Ashwin Srinivasan Hare Krishna Prabhu why did Duryodhan did not get the same glories like Valmiki of getting Purified, duryodhan and valmiki there is no comparison. Because Valmiki although he was a bad person he followed the instructions of Naradmani. But Duryodhana never followed anybody's instructions. So that is why no comparison. Ajay Rash Sharma. Next question. Why does our mind seduces us for doing wrong and then scolds us for doing wrong. So this is because of the fickle nature of mindakrishna. So same question is being asked by Arjuna to Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita what is that thing which is forcefully engaging me in doing wrong things. And I know that it is wrong. I know it is sinful. But Papam charathi purushah bala devani yogitah forcefully something is engaging me. What is that? So that it is being explained by Lord Krishna Kamisha krodesha rajoguna Samudh bhava. That is the lust. And that lust is because of mode of passion present in our body. So that is why the Bhakti purifies the passion and ignorance in our heart. Lust and greed in our heart. If lust and greed is washed off the heart then we can control our senses very very nicely. And why mind then when the mind is under influence of Satvoguna then it can give good advice. So Krishna has given us conscience. Krishna requests from the heart please do not do this activity. But then if we are very mad getting carried away by lust and ignorance, by passion and ignorance, lust and greed then a person does not hear this voice of conscience. So once that ignorance is taken away, the effect is gone. Then a person repents what have I done? In this way? Mind is constantly cheating us. Sometimes in Satvaguna mind will give us good advice. Sometimes in Tamaguna mind may give us bad advice. Sometimes in association we'll understand oh this is very nice. Krishna consciousness is good. Sometimes we'll doubt Krishna consciousness. This is because of the different energies which are influencing the mind. So that is why rather than depending upon our mind just like when we are traveling we take the guidance of a map. In a similar fashion take the guidance of map given by Krishna in the form of Veda Shrimad Bhagavatam and not depend on one's mind, it will cheat us. Next question is by Ashutosh Deval. Is chanting the solution for high depression mental health issues? Whereas Prabhupadaji said in a quote that one comes to Guru for health issues and pay Guru hundred rupees for health is not good for health. Very nice question. So chanting should not be taken as a means to cure any of the material maladies of body or mind. Chanting should be done as a means of simply satisfying Krishna. So yes, it is a fact that all the problems, physical and mental will be solved permanently by chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra. But Hare Krishna Mahamantra should not be done with this understanding. Then we are engaging Namavatar Krishna's Holy Name which is non different from Krishna in our seva. I don't want any seva. Let me suffer from depression. Let me suffer from physical diseases. I am chanting just to satisfy Krishna. And in course of that seva if my depression goes away, if all the other things go away, then that is very nice and that will go away. Don't worry. So just chant for the satisfaction of Krishna. Don't worry about personal discomforts. Next question is by Jaish Tanwar hare Krishna how to choose a guru and understand he is good for us. A nice question. So how to choose guru? You can read Science of Self Realization book in the website which I mentioned Prabhupada IO Prabhupadbooks.com you'll find a book Science of Self Realization in that great detailed discussion is there how to choose a spiritual master. And to explain you briefly, it is simple. Just like how do we choose teachers in this material world? Teacher means who is explaining me the knowledge of books very nicely. As simple as that. So books have got perfect knowledge. Similarly, the creator Krishna Veda is Chasarva. Aham krit veda veda chaham. I am the creator of Vedas. I am the perfect noor of Vedas. So Krishna has given us the vedas the books, bhagavad gita. Any person who simply helps us to understand this knowledge which is given by Krishna God easily he is a proper spiritual master. Not very complicated. Teacher means anybody who helps us to understand the books nicely. Unfortunately, some people are telling I was hearing one video, a person who is famous I have never read Bhagavad Gita. I read rather newspapers and magazines. I thought so many people are following him. This teacher tells I have never read books, I read some other thing. Then how your teacher, sir? Then it is cheating which is going on. So that is why they're giving instructions which are not at all in accordance with instructions of Krishna. So we should have faith in Krishna. All the spiritualists take him as authority. So anybody who repeats the instructions of books helps us to understand that easily. He is a teacher. Next question is by Rohit Prabhuji will we carry the Bhakti mark we have been following in the next birth or would we start from zero in the next life? So the answer of this question Krishna again explains in Bhagavad Gita prattevayona vidyate nehabikramanashua vidyate. There is no diminution in this endeavor. You endeavor for spiritual advancement and it goes to your permanent account. In this material world everything is gone but spiritual life. Whatever credits you have accumulated you have attained thousand units of spiritual advancement. Next life you start from thousand units or 40% you could finish you start from 40% in the next life. In this way you keep on accumulating the credits and when it is sufficiently accumulated your spiritual life becomes perfect. So that is why as much as possible throughout the day keep on chanting. You are accumulating spiritual credits. Once you have chanted the name of Krishna nobody can steal that spiritual advancement from you. And when it is sufficiently accumulated our life is perfect. Next question again by Rohit is why does ego come into picture even when we are doing seva for others? How do we stay purified and extend selfless seva and also stay away from ego during seva? Very nice question. So thus it is mentioned by the Goswamis that there are weeds which grow and they are also I guess six in number only nishaddhar, Kutinathi, Jeevi, Hinsa, Pooja, Lab, Pratishtha. So these six weed they grow in the heart when we follow devotional service. Devotional service is compared to the Shravanam Kirtanam chanting hearing like pouring water. And when you pour water along with the main crop weeds also they come. And such weeds are a person may develop this false ego when we engage in the service of others and contaminations can come. He can desire. Just like if you have done very nice book disposition someday or you have done very nice charity then you can become in the assembly of devotees. Oh. I am very nice devotee. I give so much of my wealth every month. Or I do so nice saver. I give so many hours in the service. I distributed so many books. So then pride can come. And like this the desire to be worshipped by others be praised by others and other material desires can develop in the heart simply by doing devotional service. So that is why we have to be careful to pluck out these weeds as we notice. So how we can do that? So that chattanama prabhu recommended by constantly chanting Hare Krishna mantra. That is why incessantly Satatam kirtayantomam throughout the day we have to practice when the tongue is not doing anything or even if it is doing something unimportant use it in the service of chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra morning to evening. And in this way we can keep all these bad properties, bad qualities at bay and engage in pure service always. Next question is okay. So our time is over. Thank you so much. Questions are also over. Time is also over. Last question. Okay prabhu, how can we know that we have accumulated 100% spiritual credit? So a person is completely self realized. Just like when you eat food, you understand, isn't it? It so you understand that you are not the body, you are spirit soul. You are not able to just understand spirit. You are able to perceive spirit. You are able to see Krishna face to face. You are no longer in this material world, but you are living in the spiritual world. And in this way we can understand.