Nama vishnu padaiyakrishna prashtaya Bhutale shrimate Bhaktive Swami Nitinamine namaste saraswate gauravani pracharine niravishesha Shunivadi Pashatyadeshri krishna Chaitanya prabhu nityananda Shri Advai Gadadhar shiva Sadhi gaura Bhaktivrinda namu mahavadanyaya Krishna Prayam pradayati Krishna Krishna Chaitanya namne Gorath vishay Namah Namo. Brahmanya devaya go brahmad. Hitaija Jagad hitai Krishna govindai namonamah karunasindho dina bandhu Jagatpati Gopesh gopika Kantaradha. Kanta Namosuthe Tapta kanchanaga Radhe Vrindavaneshwari rishabhan sute devi pranamami haripriya Vansha kalpataru Biasa kripa sindhu Bia Patitanam Pavanabhyo Vaishnavyo namo. Namah. Hari Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari Hare Hare Rama. Hare Rama. Rama. Rama hari. Hari. Hare Krishna very warm welcome to all of you. People are trying to figure out what is missing in my life. And there is a pool of unlimited objects of satisfaction in this material world. And people think, oh, those things. If I get in my life I would be very satisfied. Those could be higher grades in school and colleges. Those could be good positions in society having some fame, recognition that could be having stronghold in the society, position of power or position of wealth or could be simply accumulation of so many sense objects. The list is endless. So people, everybody in this material world all of them are figuring out what is missing in my life. And people tell these things in various decorated words find your passion, find your purpose and so many things. So today, using a very interesting case study which is a historical incident from Srimad Bhagavatam we will try to understand what is that thing which makes our life complete. So this history, this pastime is very beautifully mentioned. In the 9th cant of Srimad Bhagavatam there was a very great king, Nahusha. He had six sons. And Nahusha molested the wife of Indra. And thus she, being very disturbed, approached Brahmanas like Agastya and understanding the situation of the poor woman, they cursed Nahusha to become a python. Now the great king is missing. You need another king. So his other sons were requested to occupy the position of father and to rule over the kingdom. So the eldest son was Yati and he told no, I don't want to occupy this position. Because the power to rule brings with it many material infatuations. And the person loses the sight of self realization which is the ultimate objective of human form of life. Realizing I am not this body simply by putting petrol and grease in the car the driver won't be satisfied. Similarly, by attaining objects of enjoyment I will not be satisfied. Who am different from this body. But a person gets infatuated by worldly powers when he becomes king. These dev Ghana. Manav, Ghana. Or Dhanav, Ghana. So Devtas and demigods are present everywhere throughout the universe. Devatas means who are devotees of Lord Vishnu and Asuras means who are atheists. So as human beings also we have such tendencies either that of demigod or that of Asuras or that of Manavas. So at the time of marriage these things are considered that the marriage should be there. In proper ganas, if they are not compatible with each other, there would be so many fights. And then there are other considerations also. Like this horoscope matching is done very very nicely. And there are these Varnas and ashramas. So usually the Brahman boy marries a Brahman girl, kshatriya boy marries a Kshatriya girl. Why this happens? Because this is scientific also. So unfortunately, caste system became degraded. And it was never a caste system. It was a Varnashama system that got degraded into a caste system where people unauthorizedly they occupied the position of a priest and they were not allowing other people to come to the priesthood. And my son would become next priest. His son would become next priest even though they may not be qualified. However, this is not the mood of Varnashrama system. In Varnashrama system classification is done so that as per the capacity of person, education and rules and regulations could be introduced so that he can elevate to higher standard of life. Shudra is supposed to be expected to rise to Vasha, Kshatriya and then eventually Brahmana platform. Just like we have so many grades in our schools 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 10th, 10th plus two, then graduation, post graduation. Now these different grade standards do not exist. So that a pre primary student should always remain at pre primary level. No one is expected to come to primary level. Rather, promotion is the only objective of creating these grades. Similarly in Manashama also there is proper division because promotion is the only objective. If a very new boy is given a book of algebra, he would not be able to understand basic arithmetic also. So thus Gradation is there. Now you follow this much only you are allowed to play. Study little and then you can become more serious when you are able to tackle the subjects at your level. This is Varnashrama System. So thus proper classification is required. So that gradually from Shudra Vaishya people can come to Brahmana. From there they can become Vaishnava and understand God. So God realization is ultimate objective of all these divisions. So Brahmanas have a specific duty. Now the duty should match a person's inclination. In today's education system we see most of the people are not interested. The toppers also get burnt out. They are not interested in education. But the society's design is like everyone is forced to study. So no study is meant only for higher classes. Especially Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vashyas also sometimes, but especially for the Brahmanas topmost, education is meant for they are naturally inclined to study, to do research about absolute truth. So everything is there in the DNA that everyone understands. Now what is our inclination, likes, dislikes. So Kshatriya needs certain kind of valor, chivalry and certain other features fearlessness. So all these things should be maintained. Thus, this DNA has to be preserved. So the proper physiology psychology is continued as a hereditary principle when this marriage takes place among the same qualified people. So Kshatriya man kshatriya woman would marry Brahmana man. Brahmana woman should marry so that the child who takes birth, he is also having such Brahmanical inclinations. And thus it's easy for them to get trained. So it is very simple scientific system. So to preserve the genes, to preserve the species specific mentality. Because specific jobs can be very well undertaken by people of those mentalities. These kinds of marriages are done and the people are also satisfied. Because the men women have similar inclinations and they have got the same type of training. But in some circumstances marriage happens not between the same castes. And they are of two types, anulom and Pratilom. Anulom means that man belongs to a higher caste Brahmana. And woman could be belonging to Kshatriya. That is also accepted. Just like Kardamuni, he was a Brahmana, got married to Devhuti, the son of Manu who was Akshatriya. But Pratiloma man is Kshatriya. And that is not very congenial. That is not allowed as per Vedic culture that will create disturbance in the society. But in this case, Devyani requested please don't consider ODS as per the Vedic rules and regulations for marriage. Because this is the arrangement of the providence. And then she explained how she got cursed by Kacha. Kacha is son of Brihaspati who went to get education from Shukracharya. Shukracharya was knowing a very special art of Mrit sanjeevini. Any person who dies untimely or people die untimely death, that is not natural. So any person who dies untimely, they can be brought back to life. So Kacha learned this art under the direction of Brihaspati and Shukracharya's sorry, under the direction of Shukracharya, Brihaspati's son learned this art. And Shukracharya's daughter Devyani proposed for marriage. But then he was taking Guru and Guru's family with great oil and reverence. Guru is on a very exalted position. So Kachato, I cannot marry. You belong to a very exalted your daughter of my Guru. So you are very elevated. I am fallen. I belong to your servant category. So she became very offended. She cursed Kacha that although you have learned this art but it will not be put into proper use. And thus Kacha also countercursed that you will never get a Brahmana husband. For no reason you are cursing like this. So thus she told us, please see, I can never get a Brahmana husband. So now it is arrangement of providence that you have come here and you have taken me out. Offer your hand now please accept me. So it is Kshatriya's duty not to reject any proposal made by any woman. And thus Yayati accepted the proposal of Deviani. And then Deviani came out and she went crying and sobbing to her father. And she narrated the entire incident to Shukracharya and Shuk somewhere. Okay, I think there was some internet issue. So I'll just cover some portion. I got to know you might not be online that time. So Deviani, who was friend of Sharmeshtha, daughter of a king, she was pushed into a well and she was rescued by King Yayati who accepted Devyani as his wife. Now Devyani, when she was pulled out of well, she went to Shukracharya and she narrated the entire incident that this is how she had pushed me in the well. And Shukracharya, he lamented the position. And out of affection for his daughter, he wanted to see the king immediately. And he charged towards the palace of the king. And the king became very much afraid when he got to know that Shukracharya is coming here, very powerful here. So Vishaparava, the king father of Sharmishtha in order to settle the situates. And although Shukracharya was very, very angry, but when he saw that the king was actually very much sorrowful, he was repenting. Shukracharya became pacified and the king told, please forgive me, my daughter is foolish, she should not have done that. But I am always at your disposal, please order me. How can I satisfy? So Shukracharya told, so Devyani will tell, you have to satisfy her. She got offended. So he told, yes, whatever Deviani wants, I will fulfill her desire. So Deviani told that in my marriage, your daughter Sharmishtha and all her friends who were there and I got insulted in presence of all of them. They should accompany me as my maid servants. So king was knowing, if I deny, it could be very, very dangerous. Any words coming out of the mouth of Brahmana Krishna makes sure they come to pass because of so many austerities that they have in their life. So king agreed, okay, I agree. So whenever you get married, I would send my daughter and all her friends as maid servants to you. And in this way, King Yayati accepted Deviani, Sharmishtha and all their friends as well. But Shukracharya warned, so this girl Sharmishtha is going with my daughter. But you make sure that you do not enjoy indulge into physical pleasures with Sarmishtha that will not bring good fortune to you. So in Vedic culture, because many, many people were inclined towards self realization. Just like we see the example of Yati, he could have become the king of entire planet. But he was very much inclined towards self realization. And kingdom of the entire planet was also not very attractive to him. Like this, the sons of Daksha Daksha produced thousands of sons and all of them wholesale were being converted into devotees, into sanyasis directly by Naradmani. So just imagine, 10,000 men are less overnight now who will find a match for women. So thus in Vedic culture it was and in the nature's course also women population is usually more than the male population and more sovereign. In the Vedic culture, when many males are going for sannyas, now every woman deserves a husband. So the solution is such people who can maintain many, many wives like Kshatriyas, they were allowed to keep many wives. So in this way all the women were able to have husband. Just like Vasudev Krishna's father, when he married Deviki he married all the other sisters also. I think there were six or seven in number whatever so he married all of them. Sabarimoni married all the 50 princesses. So in this way it was allowed because men were less to get married to women. So all of them they went along with the king who was maintaining all of them. And in this way Devyani got impregnated by the king and gave birth to nice children. And meanwhile Sharmishtha also developed similar desire. Thus one day in seclusion Sharmishtha approached the king Yayati and she told that I also desire a child. Dear king, please satisfy my desire. Now it is the duty of the king to satisfy the desire of any woman who approaches the king for enjoyment he cannot deny. The king has to maintain that woman as his wife. So this is religion. Denying the hand of a woman is irreligious. For a Shatriya king shatriyas are trained to accept any kind of challenge. Whether a woman is accepting for marriage or somebody's challenging them for a fight. Even though death is certain in fight or somebody's challenging for a gambling match. So all the normal circumstances gambling is irreligious. But for a king it is religious accepting such proposal. So Kshatriyas were trained in such a way that they cannot deny any such proposals. So even though Shukracharya had warned but this is religion. Religion means even though death is certain, even though loss is certain we have to follow abide by the rules and regulations of the scriptures. Now we do so much of calculation and despite all the calculation there is always suffering in the life. So we have to understand we are eternal beings. So whatever good or bad has to happen for this life has been decided as per the activities of previous life. Now in this life if I am very religious follow the rules and regulations of the vedas my next life would be glorious. If I am perfectly religious. What is perfection of religion? Sabaypun Sam Parodharmo yato bhaktir Adhokshajay Parodharmo the topmost religion is Bhakti of Adhokshaja Krishna. So if I am very religious I will go back to Goddess. I will attain spiritual life. If not I am able to attain this perfection of religion. At least I can go to heavenly planets, have a sattvic body so that I don't degrade to animal species. So thus without caring for profit and loss thus I request all of you please do not care for profit and loss in this life. That we have to tolerate throughout the Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam all the scriptures it is being mentioned. Karmanevadikara Ma faleshu Kadachana you have right to do your duty. Duty you should do as per the scriptures. But the results one should offer to Krishna do not worry about the results they have been pre decided and they belong to Krishna. So please you try to settle this matter. And Shukracharya understanding that king has disobeyed his proposals Shukracharya cursed the king to become old immediately. And the king became very much disturbed. And King pleaded requested but Shukracharya told no it is not possible. This curse cannot be taken back. He told no, it is lost for your daughter. Please understand my lust is not satisfied. I have not sufficiently enjoyed with your daughter please do something. Shushukracharya also wondered oh yes this is fact. If now king has become old my daughter is also young so it will be a loss for my daughter. So Shukracharya told the curse cannot be taken back. But if you can exchange your old age with any young man then that is possible. Any young man will have to take old age from you and you can take his youth. This is solution. So King Yayati then went to the young people who were closest to him who would not reject his order and they were his sons. So Yayati became shameless. Thus Lord Krishna tells him bhagavad gita kama is tai sai rita gana prapadhyanthyanga devata when a person becomes mad, he surrenders to other devi devtas So ultimately when a person is having so many sensual desires they become mad. They don't understand all these Devatas are there from where they are getting their powers and these Devatas also are under disturbance. Some demons are attacking always. So how will I be satisfied by worshipping these Devatas? And what is the source of power to all these Devatas? They are not able to think about all these things. And anyway this life is temporary. Why to attain something temporary but people become mad I want this thing so I want somehow and they start worshipping particular Devtas. So any person who wants to enjoy materially such a person is called a madman. So thus King also became like a madman and without any shame he started requesting his sons you please take my old age. Let me become young because I want to enjoy. I have not satisfied my lust. So King approached the eldest of the sons Yadu and who is Maharaj Yadu? Maharaj Yadu is great devotee of Krishna Yadavyan Bhavaye Malayasiyeva Chandanam it is told that Krishna one of the reasons why he came here was to satisfy to glorify the dynasty of the Yadus so Yadhu was a great devotee of Krishna and Lord Krishna was supposed to appear in the dynasty of Yadhu. Thus when Yadhu was requested by Yayati to exchange his youth for his old age yadhu told my dear father if a person doesn't enjoy so he presented his decision very nicely. So this is the way people are trained in Vedic culture. Even though you are denying but you can present it in very proper words. So he told that you have become old untimely and I am not very pleased with this old age which has come upon you. Because this material enjoyment while the person is young is usually required so that a person can renounce easily in the old age. And renunciation is the ultimate objective of human form of life. If a person is attached to the sense objects life after life, he has to take birth and suffer from unlimited diseases, old age, death and birth. And so that a person is able to cultivate the spirit of renunciation. Material enjoyment is usually required while the person is young. Thus, the Varnashrama system gradually proposes a path of grahasthasram, then vanaprasa and then ultimately sanyas. So thus, directly we see in the newspaper, it keeps on happening a lot. Many, many sannyasis and Sadhus are not able to keep their vows because it is difficult. There is no proper training. So proper training is given and gradually a person gets detached and eventually he takes sanyas. So thus he told I am not very happy by this because enjoyment in youthhood, when a person does, he understands this is actually bringing more frustration to my life. Those who are wise, obviously like Yati and Prerath Maharaj and other great personalities, they directly take to sannyas. But such wisdom is very, very rare. So in the absence of such wisdom, simply by hearing, they can understand and follow. This practical thing is allowed. You go and you practically indulge in sense enjoyment. Then you see how miserable your life becomes and you will be easily able to renounce it at 50 years of age. So indirectly in this statement, he expressed to his father that I also cannot exchange my youthhood because that would be a hurdle in my renunciation. So, even though the words were polite and very gently intelligently, he expressed his decision. Maharaj Yayati was displeased. Because usually a son is always supposed to be obedient to the father. This is Dharma of Son. Now, today, in today's scenario, suppose a father asks sons, my dear son, you please become old and I want to take your youth so that I can enjoy. So no son would agree to the proposal. However, the son Puru of Maharajayati, he agreed to the proposal. And any son who follows the Varnashrama system Vedic culture nicely cannot deny any instruction of his father. It can be materially, right or wrong. But the dharma of the son is to agree by the order of the father. Why such apparently illogical instruction is given? No, it is not illogical. It is very, very logical. Ultimately, we are all here in the material world because of the disease called independence. Now everybody's fighting for the rights. I want to become independent. So our country is independent. Many nations are independent, but are people happy in an independent nation? So, just like a child cannot be happy independently, child has to depend upon the parents. Similarly, we as living entities are supposed to practice dependence upon Krishna. We can never be happy independently. When we depend upon Krishna, become very disciplined in our life following rules and regulations of the Vedas. By such dependence we become happy. So in order to teach this dependence now it is not easy to understand the science of Supreme Lord who Supreme Lord is and depend on him directly. So every person has got some authority. This spirit of dependence is cultivated. Don't remain absolutely independent. So everybody has some authority in the Vedic culture. So ultimate purpose of this material world is to take the living entities back to the spiritual world. To give them relief from unlimited anxieties, stress, birth, death, holdage and disease. So how this plan can be executed in this material world? This happens in the system of Varnashrama. In Varnashrama the society is guided by the Brahmanas. And the Brahmanas are in constant touch with the supreme personality of Godhead. Their job is not to do any job ever, not to earn any money whatsoever, not to accumulate anything whatsoever dependent upon Krishna. And either they will collect grains from the field which are left after the crops are harvested or they will go and beg in the house of householders. So that there is an opportunity for household to advance by giving them donations. And they can preach Krishna consciousness to them. So in such a way Brahmanas would maintain themselves because they are free from all such lust, greed and other things. Brahmanas are worthy to be taken advice from. They have no personal vested interests. So such exalted sages who have gradually they move towards attaining eternal life being devotee of Krishna. And this is enacted with the help of a monarch, a proper administrator. So brahmanas. Guide the king. So king can never violate the injunctions of the Brahmanas. Brahmanas are authorities for Kshatriyas. Then Kshatriya king is authority for all the subjects. The subjects can never deny the order of king. So now everybody protests against everyone. The children are protesting against father. The subjects are protesting against the kings. This is not the Vedic culture. So the order of king is supposed to be followed by the subjects. And among the subjects also there are many households. So in every household also father is the head of the family and he is the authority for the small institution. In this way everybody has got authority to follow. For the employee employer is the authority. In this way everybody is told to follow some authority. Cultivate the spirit of dependence. And in this way the order of God percolates in the society. And if the king is not proper, then Brahmanas can remove the king also simply by cursing. They are so powerful and it has happened in the history. So thus a son also is taught to be dependent on the father. A son can never deny the advice of the father. Then why Yadu Maharaj such an exalted person in whose dynasty Krishna chose to appear? He denied the instruction of his father only for the sake of Krishna consciousness. Because he understood if I become old and that would be impediment in Krishna's appearance, in my society, in my dynasty, he was knowing Krishna is going to come. So he did not want to delay this process. He was knowing devotees are having extraordinary wisdom by the mercy of Krishna that my youth would come back and all these things will happen. But he did not want to delay the appearance of Krishna. He was eager to see Krishna descending in his dynasty, so that Krishna's descent is not disturbed. Krishna's service is not disturbed. He disobeyed his father. So this disobedience is not it appears to be irreligious, but it is supremely religious. This is just like Kumaras defined the order of Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma told the four Kumaras, his sons to get married. But they were interested only in self realization and they denied the order of Brahma, their father. And such a decision is not considered irreligious. So only for Krishna consciousness we can disobey our authorities, but never otherwise. Otherwise we have to always follow. So Yadu, thus, for the sake of Krishna consciousness, denied the instruction of his father and other sons. They were not knowing the religious principles that I should follow completely. My father not worry that without any enjoyment we'll get old and die soon. You have to follow the father. They were not aware of the religious principles, so they also denied. But Puru agreed. And he told nobody can ever settle the debt of the Father. Because of Father we get this human body which is very valuable for self realization. So I accept whatever order you give to me. And thus he exchanged. He became old and father became young. And Yayati shamelessly again started enjoying with his wives. But because he was a king trained in Vedic culture, he was doing sacrifices also Yajnas, for the satisfaction of Krishna. And although externally he was indulging in material affairs, but he was not satisfied. And he was desiring to become devotee of Krishna within the heart and thus executing such religious duties very nicely, he started becoming detached. And finally he realized, he became disgusted with this sense enjoyment. And then he narrated this very nice allegorical story to his wife Deviani. He told Deviani, let me tell you a very nice story. Yes, please tell me, my dear husband. So he told there was once a very beautiful she goat and she fell into a wells. And a he goat was roaming around in the jungle and he found the she goat in the well. And he became captivated by the beauty of the she goat. And thus he started digging along the edges of the well along with his sharp pointed horns and was able to rescue the she goat from the wells. And being captivated by her beauty, they got married. And thus they started enjoying with each other. But the he goat was very, very attractive. And he enjoyed not just with this particular she goat, but he started enjoying with many other she goats also. And this particular she goat, she became offended by seeing this and she became envious that my husband is enjoying with so many other goats. And she went to her other maintainer, original maintainer. And this original maintainer also was already keeping a she goat. So the comparison is given to Shukracharya and the understanding which is being given here is person can be kshatriya the planet of the king of the planet, or a person can be as powerful as a Brahmana Shukracharya who is having the science of Myth sanjeevani that he can bring a person back to life. This is extraordinary. Although nobody can be brought back to life after timely death, apart from Krishna, but untimely death. Yes. This is a science, this material science, which was known to Shakracharya, but still he is compared to the species of goats only the goat's business is to eat anything which is offered. Do sense gratification enjoy sex pleasure. So a person can be kshatriya person can be very exalted brahmana worshipped by the Devatas. But if they are not devotees of Krishna then they are compared on the level of animals only. So he told this Shigot went to her original maintainer who was also maintaining another. Shigot means wife. He is a goat and he's maintaining another. Shigot. And this original maintainer became disturbed when he saw the plight of the she goat. And by his mystical powers, he made this he goat impotent. And he goat became very murous. He begged pardon and by his mercy again. He was rejuvenated. And the he goat started enjoying again. But after many, many such years of enjoyment, this he goat was not satisfied. And then he told you know, who is that goat? That is me. This is my story. So even though I was very shameless in executing all the activities of sense enjoyment I took the youth from my dear son. And shamelessly he's sitting with an old age now and I enjoyed for 1000 years enjoyment. In association of all of you beautiful women I ruled this entire planet. What is missing in my life? I have all the riches, all the opulences. But still my heart is never satisfied. So he told this activity is just like putting butter into fire. So the lusty desires are never satisfied. A person who is lusty such a person is never, never satisfied even though he can get all the quantity of gold that is available on. This planet for enjoyment or whatever is available for the enjoyment. A lusty person whose senses are not controlled will never be satisfied, even in old age. So we think, oh, I am feeling strong forces of the senses. So let me enjoy now. In old age anyway control will come. No. In old age also the desires will continue. But body will not support such desires. So. He told a person who is lusty can never be satisfied even in old age. And this activity of satisfying the lust which is the training which we are all getting. So this is very very important understanding. So we have lust. Lust means of course the gross sexual desire and any kind of desire to enjoy independent of Krishna. This is called lust. Whether I want gross sense objects or I want some subtle sense objects. Name, fame, recognition, power. In the society that is called subtle sex. Sex means at Mendria Priti Vansha Tare Bali kam kam or lust means at meendria Priti Vansha. The tendency to enjoy one's senses directly without satisfying Krishna. And what is the nature of such desires? Calm. It is just like fire. And sense objects are butter. The more you enjoy, the desire increases. So the king told what is this life of sense gratification I have enjoyed for 1000 years. I got extended youthhood but still my lusty desires are never satisfied. Rather they increase the more I enjoy. So I am very much trusty affairs of this world. The more I enjoy, the more hankering increases in my heart. And this we all realize now. And people tell no, there is restriction in the society. That is why there are crimes and all such things are happening. This is foolishness. Now for the last 1020 years we are having nice internet in the society. And the rape cases have more than doubled. Or rather I think four times in the last 20 years. So these incidents are increasing in the society. So it is their restriction and engagement in devotional service that can pacify the senses. But the more we enjoy, the more this hankering increases in the heart. So you told my dear wife, please understand, this is my situation. I am that hopeless goat who is never satisfied. So now I want to surrender completely. I have decided I will completely surrender myself and take shelter of the supreme personality of Godhead. And thus King Yayati immediately, completely surrendered himself to the lotus feet of Krishna and became pure devotee of Krishna. So 1 may wonder that this person who was a sense gratifier enjoyer how he was able to attain the lotus feet of Krishna immediately. How such realization was possible. So that is Vedic culture. So in Vedic culture if you have to enjoy sense pleasure also you have to follow certain rules and regulations. So enjoying with enjoying the sexual pleasure for procreation that is allowed. And if a person enjoys life in grahast ashram by following all the rules and regulations very nicely then a person will be able to realize the never satisfying nature of such mundane way of living and will approach towards renunciation and self realization. And if a person does not follow the rules and regulations then the situation is very very frustrating. And Krishna is seated in the heart. The king was always engaged in devotional service. He was doing sacrifice as a duty bound king. And Krishna is always seated in the heart. When he sees that the living entity is very very eager Krishna immediately responds. So the king became very very eager to surrender unto Krishna which is the price of Krishna consciousness. And thus he was able to revive his Krishna consciousness by the mercy of Krishna and Devyani also. On the other hand because the king was realized and the words of a self realized person strike us immediately. So Deviani also immediately realized. And she realized the flickering nature of society, friendship and love. And she realized we are all just like the travelers who assembled in restaurants for some time. The tourists, they come in a city. They have come from different countries, different locations. They may assemble in some restaurant for some time and then they will carry on in their own directions. So very nicely it is mentioned in Bhagavatam. So there were places where drinking water would be provided to travelers. And many travelers would assemble in those places. And they don't have any connection with each other. They just come there to drink water and they will separate in a similar fashion. We assemble in communities of society, friendship and love, husband, wife and all such relations. So these are simply hallucinatory relations. And Deviani. Understood. This is swapniva. This is just like a dream. In dream you have relations. You see such people and those relations sustain only till the time you wake up and then everything is gone. So she realized the temporary nature of this world that this life is just like a dream. We are just like travelers. This husband, wife, father, this is not reality. So because she heard the words of a realized soul she was also able to realize the fact of this life. And thus she became completely detached in the material affairs. From the material affairs. And she also fixed her mind on the lotus feet of Krishna. And she also attained the supreme destination. So thus this story is very very instructive. This is a case study that if you want to become a successful person how much ever successful you can become. Especially in Kaluga. Nobody's powerful enough to become ruler of the entire planet. Nobody can maintain unlimited number of wives. But King was able to do that and had extended youthhood enjoyed for 1000 years. And still this hankering for enjoyment was always increasing within the heart. And so many complications, curses and dissatisfaction followed. So thus it is told in the invocation verse of Sri Ishopanishad om poonamada Punamidam poona Punam udakyate poonasya Punamadaya punam abhishate poonam Adaha punam idam that supreme absolute truth is puna is complete. And poonam idam this material manifestation that we see around us this is also complete. And so many small units like us coming out of it we are also complete. So there are some theories that there was God but God is no more existing now. Because God has disintegrated itself into so many manifestations. Just like the milk transforms into buttermilk, butter, ghee and so many other products and milk, original milk does not exist. In a similar fashion god was there but God got transformed into so many other things. So God is no more existing. And there are some other theory as God created us just like father creates children and then father dies in due course of time, so God is dead. So like this various theories are there. Some people tell God has got disintegrated. Just like from a big piece of paper you can break it into many small pieces, you can tear it apart and the original page does not exist. In a similar fashion God does not exist because he has transformed himself into so many other manifestations. Or God is dead but Ishopanishad in. The Invocation mantra defines what is God actually it is told poonam Adaha god is always complete. Although Poonam adha poonamidam this material world is also complete. God is also complete. You are trying to create some facilities in this material world by artificial inventions and setting up factories and setting up your research labs. There is no need of any new inventions. This world is complete. This is coming from complete. Punam ada punam idam puna punam udachate so although this material world is complete, even though the complete energies are taken out from the complete source of all the energies, still the source remains always complete. This is the definition of absolute truth. Punasya from the complete whole punam Adaya you take out completely you take out all the energies of the God. Still God is full with all his energies. Puna punam punamev Adaya puna sapunam Adaya punam avashishate avashishate means what remains behind is puna complete person. So this is the energy of God that even though thus advaita machuta Manadi manantarupam krishna expands himself into so many forms which are as powerful as Krishna unlimited Vishnu forms. Mahavishnu garbha dakshai Vishnu shirodakshai Vishnu. In every universe such Vishnu forms are present. They enter into every atom. There are Ramadi, Moses and Lord. Rama is there, Vara is there, Matsya is there, Kurma is there. So many avataras are there. In this material world and in the spiritual world also such unlimited God expansions are coming out from the body of God. But still God remains full. His potency does not decrease. This is the nature of God. Poonamab abhishate. In spiritual world one minus one is equal to one. So it is difficult for us to conceive. But this is how things work in spiritual energy. Om poonamada poonamidam Poonath poonamodachate so thus unfortunately it is being mentioned. Everything is complete. We are also complete. There is nothing missing in our life. So any incompleteness that is felt in our life is because of incomplete knowledge of the complete whole. Complete whole is Krishna. Because of incomplete knowledge of the complete whole incompleteness is felt. It is not fact incompleteness is not fact. We are complete. But because of ignorance of our complete nature that we are part and parcel of Krishna. We simply need to realize, revive our position as being part and parcel of Krishna and engage in his service. And thus we'll be completely satisfied. So this king who was never satisfied by any of such enjoyment and king's wife, they became completely satisfied by leaving all such material enjoyments and completely surrendering to the lotus feet of Krishna. And this is not just a very old story. Oh. Who has seen Prabhu? You are telling a story of Yadu dynasty of the father of Maraj. Yadu Krishna came 5000 years ago when came Yadu Maraj, when came his father. But no, this we can see now also in India we have a history of so many devotees. Their life was very much messed up by the society who could not understand devotional service. The six Goswamis of Vrindavan and all the other great devotees in our land. And even now the devotees of Krishna consciousness movement how Prabhupada brought them from the most affluent of the nations. And some of them were belonging to the richest families of the planet. They became disciples of Prabhupada. Started living a very humble life. And they became completely satisfied. Then they felt completeness in their life. So I request that we pray to Krishna to realize the nature of this lusty desire. Actually all of us are doing nothing but increasing our lusty desire. We want to get married to a beautiful partner. We want good education. We want good name, fame, recognition, resources in society. By this our lust always increases. Hankering always increases. So there is no use of such mundane activities. So yes, we can continue acting in the same fashion. But the result should be offered to Krishna. Not for our sense enjoyment. Then all these activities will make us feel complete. So thus the instance we can understand from the current devotees, from the medieval devotees and from these very ancient devotees that only by devotional service similarly Yamunacharya, he was also a king. And he also had such enjoyment with many many women. But when he became devotee of Krishna, he tells Yadavadi Mamach so if one day we are able to attain this very exalted platform of Krishna consciousness by mercy of Sila Prabhupada, then Krishna we can also attain this consciousness, this pleasure simply by remembering the lotus feet of Krishna. Yamuna Charsses I am getting newer and newer pleasures in my heart. And that greatest pleasure which materialists consider sex pleasure. When I think of such activities which I've done in my past life my mouth gulps in distaste and I spit at the thought. So Krishna consciousness pleasure is so nice that this uncontrollable urge, this kind of pleasure becomes distasteful. So much so that a person can spit at such a thought. So just imagine, should we not be greedy for such a pleasure. And this situation can be attained simply by serving spiritual master and chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra. So just see, simply by chanting a person can relate such an extraordinary pleasure. So we should be very very greedy eager to follow it. So thus this is very important instance and this is very important invocation verse god is complete and we are also complete. Any incompleteness felt is simply because of ignorance of the complete whole. So let us try to cultivate Krishna consciousness. And let us try to bring others who are connected or not connected to us into Krishna consciousness. In this way we will all feel completely satisfied. This is what is missing in our life. So thank you so much for patiently hearing the story. Now we have brought very nice kirtan for you. Simply by doing this kirtan we will come to this platform of feeling completion in our life. So as lead Prabhuji singer would be singing we can hear nicely and then with complete attention absorption we also can sing in the same tune. So let us try to absorb ourselves in the kirtan. It will be for five to 10 minutes and after that we will take up questions and answers. Hearth. Krishna. Krishna. Heartache. Heartache. Heart it Ram hare hare Krishna krishna Krishna heart ram harm Hari ram Hare Haram Sai ram krishna hare Krishna krishna krishna hare Hare haram hall ram hare hare Krishna hare hare it's not. It's not. Hallelujah krishna krishna Krishna hare hare hare Rama hare Rama ram Rama hare Hare Ham ram to Sha ram ram hare hare krishna Krishna, Krishna the duties is it a fact? So answer is yes, it is a fact. Because very nicely it is explained in the example. A person is going on the road and he finds some money on the road. So one is he picks up the money and he starts enjoying that. That is the life of a materialist. That everything is created by God. It's god's property. I come here and then I start enjoying anything whatever I see. Simply because you see something, it does not become your property. But we don't consider that its God creation should be used for God. We start enjoying it. Then there is more advanced level. No, it is not my money on the street. So let me not touch it. Let me move on. This is the life of impersonalists. So they don't want to enjoy this material world. They don't touch the material resources. They move on. They carry on. And what would a devotee do? The best course of action. You pick up the money on the street and try to find out whom does it belong to? And then give that money to that person. So that is what the devotees are doing. They want to understand this entire world belongs to somebody, whom does it belong to? This body has been created by somebody who has created this body. So this body with all its possessions and this entire world resources should be used in the service of the proprietor. So thus that is called the work in devotion. You should work, pick up the money and then give it back to the owner. And renunciation is still better because you do not want to become a criminal by enjoying the money which doesn't belong to you. So Renunciation is good for self realization. But the real advancement is the advanced level of self realization is understanding whom does the money belong to and giving it to him. That is called devotional service or work in devotion. Thus Krishna tells this is better than renunciation. That is called vikyuktavaragya. You are right. Next question is by Vinayak Chaurasya. Hare Krishna prabhuji how to wake up early in the morning and do chanting and sadhana. Due to some medicine I'm not able to get up early in the morning and do mangalarti and chanting. Please help. Okay. So getting up early in the morning as you told you are taking some medicines. So you can try to sleep early. Because anyway you are getting up at certain time. So why don't you sleep early so that you can accordingly even counting the influence of the medicines you can get up early in that way. But still if the situations do not allow as of now then it does not matter. Krishna understands. So try your level best. Try to sleep early counting the effect of medicine. Still if it is not possible then try to get up as early as possible without compromising the health. Krishna understands that situation. Do devatas demigods become happy when a person is progressing in Krishna consciousness? Even though a devotee doesn't worship demigods except Lord Krishna? Yes, they become very happy. They want to serve the devotee. I am following Krishna conscious life by not joining temple full time. And neither I am a married person. I am in my 40s. Can I progress in my Krishna Bhakti and attain spiritual world by being single? Yes, you can attain. So marriage is recommended because usually it is difficult to control the desires that we have and we may end up doing illicit sex. But now situation is very toxy turvy in Kaliyuga. So generally it is recommended that we should marry. But if you can think that you can contain in devotee association you can continue without marriage. There is no bar in training Krishna consciousness. But for general people marriage is recommended if they are not living full time in the Brahmachary Ashram. Hare Krishna prabhuji after getting some job and after that giving the result of action to Krishna we can get relieved of all sinful activity of that job. Is that so? Yes, very much. And not just relief from the sinful activities of that job we can get the consciousness of a sanyasi in Bhagavad Gita. It is mentioned a person who contributes at least minimum 50% of his wealth to Krishna. And of course we have to do our Sadhana and all the duties very nicely. But the result at least 50%. If we offer to Krishna along with our Sadhana then such a householder can have the consciousness of a sanyasi and can attain same perfection. Okay. So if devotees wish, we can have some more questions. I'm waiting for some questions to reflect in the chat box. Hare Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari. Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hari krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. If anyone has any questions, you can please post. Else we can wind up today's session. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hari Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna. Krishna. Hari. Hari. Hari Ram. Hari ram. Ram. Ram. Hari. Hari. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. The question is Hari Krishna prabhuji how to practice perfect Brahmacharya. So perfect Brahmacharya can be obtained by complete absorption in Krishna consciousness. So living entity is having desires. Now the desires are satisfied on material level, gross level, mental level or spiritual level. So if we are always absorbed just like when we are dreaming so we are not disturbed by the gross desires. Because we are absorbed on a mental platform. So, if we are absorbed on a spiritual platform we will not at all be disturbed by mundane desires of mind and body. And thus we can control our senses and maintain perfect Brahmacharya and Srila Prabhupada. Such an elevated stage of Krishna consciousness where a person is absorbed in the service of Krishna can be attained only when the disciple has intimate relationship with the spiritual master. So by surrendering and serving spiritual master very nicely following all the rules and regulations nicely chanting offenselessly hare Krishna Mahamantra remaining absorbed on spiritual platform one can follow Brahmacharya. But if we keep ourselves on material platform, it won't be possible. Next question is by Sorab Kumar I got associated with Iscon and started chanting 16 rounds. But in between getting diverted towards material world did I commit any sin? Not necessary. That could be fact that we might have committed sins. So our Krishna consciousness gets covered because of two kinds of. It is called consuming poison. One is committing sins and another thing is offending a vaishnava. So if a person commits sins still by chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra one can come out of it mundane material sins. But if we offend a vaishnava then the only solution is to take shelter of the bona fide Vaishnava. And if the Vaishnava is pleased we can come out of the effects of such an offense and revive our Krishna consciousness. So these mistakes are very very dangerous. So either we would have committed some Vaishnava prasad so Krishna consciousness got stopped or some sins also can be the reason. The lusty activities, sinful activities gyna, Vijayan and Ashnam they finish the urge of self realization. And another thing is simply association of the materialist that also covers our intelligence. That is why association is required. So we always have to live in the association of devotees. So we get some inclination and if we don't maintain association of devotees this inclination, interest and faith will go away and we'll be back to square one in material life. And then we follow, we suffer. We may realize oh I came across Krishna consciousness, let me again follow now. So these could be the main reasons. So I request, please try to always keep yourself in the association of devotees and avoid offending avaishnava at all cost. And avoid sinful activities also. Next is by Rajiv Khanna. Can we give Prabhupada books free to our customers with our products? Yes, why not? Very much, please do it. Next is by Monisha Sharma. We started RT shi Krishna Chaitanya prabhu doyakaromore in the morning. Is it okay? Or any other RT we can do around 08:00 a.m.? Yes, it is okay. You can do Shi Krishna Chatanya Prabhu. The most important is to do Guru Puja. So if you are doing Guru Puja every day shay Guru Charanapadma Kevalabhati, Sadma Vandomai Savadhan mate so this is most important. So this we should do along with Hare Krishna Kirtan. And then we can do Sri Krishna Chaitanya Prabhu dayakaram or we can do Yashomati Nandan or other songs we can sing. But Guru Puja is most important. Along with Hare Krishna Kirtan. Anything extra is well and fine. Any glorification can be done. Hare Krishna Prabhuji. Is it fine to do mangala arthi for the person not able to get up in brahmurta time? Yes, it is fine if you are not able to get up in the morning or that is the ideal time. Whenever you get up, you can sing guru Vashtaka, I am an optician. You told? Yes. Along with your products you can give Prabhupada books. That is the best gift that we can give to anybody. Next question is by Saurabh Kumar. Maya is very strong. As his divine grace Prabhupada said, it keeps pulling me towards materiality. How to avoid Maya. Totally. So by always keeping ourselves in Krishna consciousness. When there is sun, there is no light. So we have to always keep ourselves fixed in Krishna consciousness. How that can be done? So it is simple. Always engage in service of Krishna under the direction of devotees. There's one thing engaging always in service of Krishna under the direction of devotees. And if it is not possible. At sometimes we don't find service. Then keep on chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra. So Prabhupada told by these two things we can avoid Maya altogether krishna Surya Sama Maya Hai andhakar so we should try to constantly chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra throughout the day and engage in the service of Krishna. So when there is always Krishna seated within the heart, try never to forget Krishna. Then there is no scope of Maya. So this is difficult. But under guidance of devotees if you practice Krishna consciousness it is possible and that is required. We have to attain this platform. Kishoi chaudhry. Next question. Is euthanasia allowed in Spiritualism? No, that is not allowed. Next question is by Abhishek Kumar. Okay. Sorry, rohit bale Rao. Even after understanding Krishna consciousness, my mind is continuously trying to pull me in materialistic things. Is it because of my past karma? What is a permanent solution? Yes, it is because of past or present karma, we have to understand. We are different from mind and body. The mind of a moth pulls the moth into fire and it loses its life. So why should we depend upon our mind? As child we depended upon the mind of our parents. Otherwise you could have been playing the entire day out and would have spoiled our lives. So in a similar fashion we should not submit to the demands of mind and body. So it is very nice to know that we are desiring Krishna consciousness. At least knowledge is there what is right in life. Next. We need Bala strength. Knowledge is not sufficient. I know this is right. But mind and body the force is very strong. It pulls us away. So thus it is required to follow Krishna consciousness under personal guidance of devotees. So please do that and will get strength. We'll be able to come out of it. So meanwhile, please chant Hare Krishna Mantra. Very nicely played. To Lord Balram Chaitanya Mahaprabhu for getting strength in spiritual life. Next is by Abhishek Kumar Hari Krishna. Prabhuji, is it fine to do mangalarti sometime late? Say 06:00 p.m. 06:00 p.m.? You mean in the evening for the person who is not able to get up? I mean 06:00 A.m.. Yeah, it should be at 06:00 A.m. Also you can do it. So try to do early. As early as possible. If now it is not possible, you continue at 06:00 A.m. At least start doing something. Prabhupada started Manglarti at 07:00 initially in the west when he started the movement in that also devotees were not able to come at times. So it's okay. In the initial days, slowly we'll come to Brahmorta. Next is by Ashwini Verma prabhuji, if I get job at city where Scorn temple is present if I live in the temple, how much is rent or charge? I am thinking it's better to live in good company in an unknown city. Yes, very much. Just find wherever we have our centers and try to live and whatever minimum charges you have to give. That depends upon the location of the temple. Next is by Virendrag Bhote enchanting only tongue and ears are involved. How does the mind get affected by it? Yes, mind will get affected by it if we try to chant attentively if mechanically we are doing tongue is moving and it is falling on the ears. But I am somewhere. My mind is somewhere. Then mind will not get affected. Only when we put our mind in receiving the sound with great reverence, attention and love then mind becomes purified. Thus attention is required. Next is by Unifat verse. Why ISKCON is not creating new method for spreading Krishna consciousness by which it can cover more people just like Bollywood. Yes, we are very much eager. We should use Bollywood. So I request if you can please help us to find some people who can present Krishna consciousness without any dilution then yes, that is very powerful medium. We should do it. Okay, so we are done with the questions. Thank you so much for hearing. Please keep on chanting. Always understand the ephemeral nature of this life and all the activities for satisfaction of desires of mind and body make us more and more dissatisfied. Let us try to become pure devotees by following Krishna consciousness under the direction of Srila Prabhupada and representatives and a life would be success. Thank you so much for hearing. We'll meet again very soon. Hare Krishna.