Hare Krishna. A very warm welcome to all of you. So in the past few sessions we have been discussing some verses of Nectar of Instruction. So we have shared the link also in the description. If you wish to refer, I might refer to some of those discussions we have had previously. You can kindly go through first three verses of the book Nectar of Instruction. The link you will find in description do not read now. Now let us hear what we are going to discuss. So today's topic is elevation in Krishna consciousness. What is Krishna consciousness? What is this elevation? Why is it required and how to do it? And some very important factors which we may miss ordinarily to elevate ourselves in this transcendental science we'll be discussing today? Srila Prabhupada in one of the very advanced cities of the west. It was a press conference and many media persons and they were very proud. Oh, we are residents of an advanced city. So Srila Prabhupada was asking them various questions, kind of flattering. Oh, you are living in this city, this is very opulent. And they were, yes, this is opulent city, and you have very nice arrangement, very nice roads and all very nice layout and very advanced systems. And they told yes, yes, that is fact. And people are very rich here. Very opulent living. Yes, yes, very opulent. And you have universities told? Yes, we have two. Oh, you have two. And you have studied? Yes, we have studied in the same university. So Prabhupada asked then why are there so many hippies here? And they were silent. None of them could answer. Hippies means if some of you would be aware, hippie means the supporters of counterculture movement. So in the west, people became very, very disgusted in the 1960s with the culture. Why with the culture? Because they thought, now we have all the material resources, but this culture is not letting us enjoy it nicely, so many restrictions it imposes. So they started defying everything, all the authorities, and they started taking drugs, all kind of intoxicants and no regulations in life, even though that person is very he belongs to a rich father, but then he would come out and lie down on the street somewhere and spoiling their lives. So Prabhupada told why then there are hippies in your city. Hippies means dissatisfaction. Even after all these facilities, they are completely dissatisfied. And that we can see now. Also, despite so much of advancement, as we had seen previously, various sessions, we saw some very amazing statistics that how those nations which are very much developed, most advanced, they are also suffering from great prevalence of depression and anxiety disorders. So Srila Prabhupada wanted to drive home this very important point. Nate Vidu Swarth gaTim He Vishnu Dura Shayaye Bahiratamani naha that people do not know what is the aim of life? They think some temporary advancement in my material resources as a general populace is trained money, name, fame and some skills and business. And some people around you. This will make you happy. So Prabhupada told Nate vidhu. Vidhu means they know Nate vidu. They do not know swarth gaTim. Swarth means your self interest. People do not know that the real self interest lies in serving Krishna Vishnu. They give so much of importance to this external body which is mere dress. Prabhupada tells another story that once a queen got a very beautiful bird. And this bird was so beautiful queen thought I should have a very special cage to protect and keep this bird very nicely. So she ordered a very nice golden cage. And the cage was amazing. Very very expensive. Studded with various precious jewels. And the queen was personally so much absorbed in taking care of the cage very nicely. After a few days she recognizes that the bird is no longer talking. The beautiful bird. And the queen becomes exasperated. She calls all the servants, maids and all the people and tells what has happened? Have you not fed? What is the difficulty? Why the bird is not talking? And she realized that Shiva got so much absorbed in taking care of the cage of the bird she forgot to feed the bird itself. So this is what is happening in today's reality. We are so much absorbed in this external dress. We are not taking care of ourselves. What to speak of taking care of ourselves? We do not even know what is the self who we actually are. So Prabhupada told durashaya bahir arthamanyana arthamis value. We give so much of value to this dress which is not very valuable. Yes, this human dress is very valuable if used for self realization. Otherwise we keep on taking dresses life after life. There is no dearth of dresses. God arranges as per our desires. But if we give all the value to this external dress and forget the person who is living within the dress then that is great calamity of life. If a person is blind, he cannot cross the road on his own. He needs some help and guidance. So sometimes we also help some people, some blind men to cross the road. But if the blind man takes help of a man, a man tells yes, I will guide you. And that person himself is blind. What will happen? Both of them they are having a very dangerous combination. Both of them will meet with an accident andha yatanda mana teshatantriam uru Dhamani badha. So today the situation of the world is anyway the general populace they are innocent. They do not know how to become happy in life. Just like now there is some disease. We do not know how to solve it. So there are some people who are guiding us oh please do it like this, do it like that. Although they are also committing many faults. But whatever it is, we have to have some authority in life. So unfortunately, the policymakers they themselves are not satisfied in the life. So Prabhupada told physician, heal thyself. So why should we allow somebody to make policies for us if they themselves are not satisfied in their lives? Are the policymakers of any nation completely satisfied with themselves? The answer is no. They are completely dissatisfied in their own life. So it is common sense. That is why Prabhupada told Krishna consciousness is common sense. If the policymaker himself is not satisfied, how by any of his policies can the subjects be satisfied? That is why in Vedic times the policymakers were the Brahmanas. Who is a Brahmana? Patan Pathan Yajan Yajan dhan Pathi Graha so Brahmana is completely satisfied in just studying about God and explaining about God. Patan pathan. He knows that the ultimate aim is self realization. Dhan pratik graha. So he does not waste this human form of life which is very valuable. Every moment of this human form of life is very valuable. It should not be spent at all for elevation in material life that elevation or degradation is already distant. Srila Prabhupada explains we can study it from the nature and it is so beautiful. The description of the vedas. So it is being explained just you see, python is there. So python is lying in one place sometimes lying for such a long time, it gets covered by dirt also. And that python is supplied food on its own. The python need not rush so much here and there. Where is my food prey? Automatically the prey would come to it and python would swallow it. And the python can eat entire horse also and lay there for very nicely. He would be there for months and then by the time he is hungry another food, some prey would cross its path. So python situation is like that. All the pythons, they are being fed in this way. Whereas there is another specie. And what is that specie? Sometimes your sleep at night would be disturbed by them. And they are dogs. Why the dogs are howling and crying at night? Because they are so hungry. So all this arrangement is there very nicely in the nature for all the species but not for the dogs. Dog especially condemned species. When special bad karma is performed then the soul is given the body of a dog. He would not be fed unless he gets a master, of course. So the situation of the street dog masterless dog is very very pathetic. He is always hungry. That is why you offer something to eat immediately. They would jump forward to take it. They are very very hungry always. So just see, all the pythons are fed very nicely and all the dogs are kept starving by nature. So in human form of life if you have done some bad activity, we are supposed to learn the art of tolerating. And if you have done some good activities, the good results automatically will follow. But the arrangement is done already. Need not struggle for these temporary things. So it is told in Bhagavad Gita, Bhoga Prasaktanam Taya, Aparita Chaitasam those people who are very much enamored by Bhoga and Aishwarya. So two things are driving our work in our everyday affairs. One is to get material opulences. Another is to enjoy them. So a person who is very much addicted to increase his opulence of life and he is addicted to enjoy very much in life materialistically then Samadha Navidhiyate he cannot get fixed up in Krishna consciousness. In understanding himself, his position in life, who is he different from the body? It is not possible just like a kid if a kid in the school is not studying and just he keeps on playing so the parents tell him why you are wasting for this temporary enjoyment now you work very hard. You study very nicely so that tomorrow you are well placed for a long time. Thus you can enjoy your life. A crude example. So just like a child in a school he should dedicate maximum time to build. His career or take education that is a time if that time he spends for some temporary benefit, some sporting or other entertainment then in the future he would suffer similarly. Now the aim of life is just temporary advancement. Which finishes as soon as we leave this dress. So human life should not be meant for such temporary advancements because no. I want to make it. You want to make it. You can do it. But we can see. The result that people are dissatisfied. So such people who had realization they were called the Brahmanas Sadhan Patikdara he would not take up anything for economic development. And because he is engaged in such serious task of understanding God and teaching others self realization. Yajan, Yajan. How to worship God. He engages others, also teaches others how to worship. He is not supposed to do any job. He needs to save time to guide the society very nicely and they were the policymakers. They would guide the king to make the policies. And the Brahmanas, they learn the art of remaining satisfied under any circumstance. So Brahmana is always happy, although he is poverty stricken. When Sudhama came to meet Krishna the description is there he was there in very old clothes torn clothes but Krishna as soon as he saw Sudhama, he left his Asana krishna is such a powerful king some people are not able to take him as Supreme Personality but everyone understands he was a powerful king. And Krishna left his throne immediately and made Sudhama seated on the throne and started worshipping him very nicely along with his wife. So this much respect was given to the Brahmana. Although he would keep himself poverty stricken. So we are telling no. We need to elevate people Krishna consciousness. We have done enough. Now we need to go above poverty line. We need to have so much of money and wealth. But developed nations are more under stress. And here all the Brahmanas are below poverty line. So don't we see they are the happiest. That is the great misconception of life that happiness lies in money. Little money is required. No money is required. This is the fact. Money was not at all existing. Actually barter system was existing. You have one acre of land and a cow. Everything you can produce right from your clothing to fuel to your house, woods you can grow cow dung, straw you can get make a house nicely and pass this temporary life. Learn tolerance. Absorb yourself in Krishna consciousness. So money is not at all required. However, to elevate oneself to this position is not easy. So that is why Brahmanas were on the topmost rung of the society. And such people because they are satisfied in any circumstances. They are supposed to frame the policies for the nation and king is supposed to implement them. So what is the use of making such policies where the policymaker himself is not satisfied. So that is why we should be very very careful. How are we guiding our friends? How are we guiding our children? We are not satisfied in our life. We want to make them do the same thing we have done. How shall they be satisfied following the suit? So that is why shastras tell Tasma Guru Prapade Jigyasu shreya uttamam in order to understand the truth of life, why am I suffering? How can I be happy? You should understand an elevated soul who himself is always satisfied. Not satisfied. He is in bliss and take guidance from him and thus educate our wards, our relatives and everybody around us. So then Srila Prabhupada, he brought all these people westerners to India. And Prabhupada started three main projects. One project was in Vrindavan and it was in the outskirts of Vrindavan. And they were thinking who will come here to this temple? Another project was in Mayapur. And third project was in Bombay here. And practically all these Mayapur Vrindavan anyway it was forest, it was complete jungle. And the Mumbai land, the temple which is there in Juhu now which Prabhupada established that was also jungle at that time. And the disciples Prabhupada is telling we should have a very nice twin tower guest house over here. And all our members would live here. On weekends they would come here and stay and they'll become devotees. And we'll have such city here and so many thousands of people would live. And disciples are not able to imagine that how in jungle all these things will develop. And those disciples as soon as they came to India because how you can live in jungle. They were born in the west and all such facilities were there. Air conditioners, metros, escalators, elevators which Indians had hardly seen at that time. They were used to using all these things. And when they came here they were falling sick, left and right, they are having jaundice, they are having malaria and dysentery and so many other things. It is difficult to keep up with your health. What to speak of other things. Devotees give description of Mayapur. So Mayapur there were toilets and what were the toilets? It was simply a hole in the ground and covered by some bamboo partition. That's it. One for ladies and one for men. And for Westerners it's a very out of the world experience. And while they have to go there again, it would rain heavily in Mayapur, in Bengal, so it would be completely muddy. And that field they have to cross in order to evacuate in the morning. And in this way they would sustain in the land. And there were so many animals around at night, so many insects would come and the power was not there. Can you imagine? Without power in west there is no question of being without power. But here power sometimes would come in the day. And even Prabhupada was also staying in a hut. So when you come with us to Mayapur, we'll show you that place. So we see. Oh, we say many times oh, why you have such opulent temples? You want to have a comfortable life. But it was not always comfortable. Now also it is not always comfortable. Yes, for the service of Krishna, so that people feel comfortable, we invite them. And because Prabhupada was so famous, the great people and the industrialists and all such people would travel from Calcutta to Mayapur, which is around 3 hours from there. And it was very difficult. Even now there is no proper conveyance. But people would go there to meet Prabhupada. And this couple, they came and they were very rich, one of the richest families of India. And what hospitality that time guest house was under construction and even flooring was not properly done. So the devotees could not even offer them proper beds. But they were satisfied sleeping on the floor just to meet Prabhupada. So in order to give facilities but not everyone can be so advanced and humble. So in order to give facilities so that everybody can advance in Krishna consciousness, we need to develop the place. But Prabhupada told we are very happy, this is best for us, this hut. So thus devotees prefer living in simple dwellings, hut and like that. But we see these Western people who are not at all trained up to live in such a way. They came here and they were telling that snakes were all around us, everywhere. So there are snakes and in the name of toilet you have a hole in the ground and there is no power and there are no proper bulbs. You have to use kerosene lamps. And so many other difficulties were there. But they are very much satisfied. It is not a post dated check. Oh, after some time I will retire, I'll get some money and I'll be happy. Every day they were relishing the bliss of Krishna consciousness. And they tell, we never thought of all those. So many difficulties were there this? Thought never struck our mind we should leave that was our life we were enjoying like anything so Prabhupada told this is what I want to tell you do not understand the science we need simply krishna in our life if we have Krishna then nothing else is required. Everything we have and this is assured by Krishna in the Bhagavad gita also Yasmins Tetona Dukena Guru Napi Vichalik Yamlabh BHA Chaparam Lava manyati if a person attains perfection of krishna consciousness manyat NA adikam. He feels nothing greater is required in this life. How much ever successful we come, we always aspire for something better, something more. Oh, I became very rich. And before dying they are giving us advice. Oh, please spend time with your family members. Spend time with in arts. In other things I could not indulge, so I'm not very happy on my deathbed. They are always thinking something is better. However, Devotee does not. Think something is better. Devotee thinks oh, this is best wherever I am situated now. And yasmin stythona. Dukena, guru napi vichali, he is not disturbed even by the greatest calamities. This is Prabhupada. Practically proved those very proud Westerners reporters for their Prabhupada. Why, you have hippies. So this is Krishna consciousness. However, it is not easy to elevate concept to this platform. That is why a methodical scientific process is recommended. It starts with tapasa brahmacharyana shamiyana damayanacha. So when a person is established in this understanding oh, this is very logical. This sounds logical. All the great seers of truth they have attested this fact mentioned in the Vedas and Bhagavad Gita we simply need Krishna in our life so let me try to aspire for and work for it. So tapasa Brahmacharyana he is willing to undergo tapasya some austerity shamena. He is willing to control his mind. Control his senses. And he starts chanting the name of Krishna. His spiritual life begins so this Krishna consciousness it is divided into three levels. Three stages ganesh adikari, madhyam adikari and uttam adikari. So what brahmanas we discussed who are completely self controlled who have knowledge of the Vedas who understand I am not the body. They are also considered Kanished Adikaris on the platform of Krishna consciousness. So Brahmana will be very very peaceful. But unless he surrenders to Krishna he will not feel positive happiness bliss in his life. Peacefulness can come a person may feel happy because material distress is not there. But for positive happiness he has to surrender to Krishna. Start chanting the names of Krishna. So anybody who is chanting the names of Krishna chaitanya Mahaprabhu told he is supposed to be considered a vaishnava and respect should be given to him. All respect should be given, but in the mind, if his behavior is not proper so many people you will find now even the dham. They are there. They are chanting the names of Krishna. But they would smoke and they would have many other illicit connections with opposite gender. So such people we may not associate with but because they are somehow chanting the names of Krishna, they should be given respect. Anybody who is chanting the name of Krishna, he is to be respected. But he is called Kanish Adikari. Kanish means he is just begun his spiritual life. What is the definition of Kanishadikari? It is given in Srimad Bhagavatam 11th Kanto. So it is a very big band. Neophyte. Just like pre primary, primary school, high school there is band. Many classes are there in each level. Post graduation, graduation many years are there in a similar fashion. Anybody who simply chants the name of Krishna is considered Kaneshta Dikari. And Srimad Bhagavatam describes archa. Yam e archa means the deity incarnation. The form of Krishna we see in the temple that is also Krishna only incarnation of Krishna. He appears like some material element wood, stone or like that. So a devotee who is Pujayam Shaddhayhate who is very very with great devotion he is engaged in worshipping the deities Natad Bhakteshu, Chaneshu, Sabhakta, Prakrita, Smrita. But for him, God is standing in the temple but he does not know how to deal with other devotees how to properly respect the Vaishnavas. He is considered Kanishth adikari. Kanishta Adikari has faith in Krishna but his faith is very komal. Shraddha Komal means very soft faith. Anytime the faith can be shaken. But somehow because of good activities of previous life or in this life some association, simplicity, his simple nature he is following very nicely worshipping the deity. And he's very much fixed up in deity worship. So Kanish Chadikari also is not. It starts with somebody simply chanting to the Brahmana who is very fixed up in deity worship. Brahmana means so many amazing qualities. Even fraction of those qualities we cannot find in the general people. He is very very Austria tapasya people want to enjoy in life. Brahmana voluntarily tries to take austerity in life. Make his life more and more simple more and more simple. Least dependent upon the external things tapasa. So thus he does tapasya Brahmacharyana. He follows Brahmacharya celibacy very nicely. Shame acha. He controls his senses very nicely. Senses are not driving him. He is controlling the senses. Oh. It is so difficult. And mind control. It is very difficult. But Brahmana controls the mind very nicely. Brahmana is very very peaceful. Satyam brahmana is truthful. Even though the enemy can come to his home and he will ask what is there? Where is your jewelry? In your house? If you have, he will tell oh, here it is. Please take it. So he is very truthful and he's forgiving so somebody many times people ask Prabhu how to handle these colleagues in office? I cannot tolerate sitting them or even seeing them. If somebody speaks something to us, we cannot forgive them. But brahmana is forgiving So even if somebody is attacking him, even trying to take his life, brahmana will forgive. So forgiving nature is the symptom of Brahmana astikyam and Brahmana has very strong faith in the Vedas. But understanding of Krishna is not there. But somehow he is very nicely engaged in deity worship with great regulation. Right on time, he gets up in the morning, worships the deity very nicely. He also is considered neophyte. He is very new in the Krishna consciousness platform. So on the neophyte stage, the situation is very, very dangerous. Just like a person who is there in the ICU, he can pass away anytime. Very dangerous. So those who are on the neophyte platform, their Krishna consciousness can finish anytime by any attack of Maya by the wrong association. So that is why quickly, if he has understood the importance of Krishna consciousness, he should try to raise himself to the second platform. And what is that? That is called madhyam adikari. Madhya means intermediate platform. So what is this? Madhya Madhikari, how is it defined? So Madhya Madhikari, his faith is very strong. Although he cannot back his faith with proper scriptural references. But very clearly he can understand who is God ishwara Tad, Adhineshu, who are devotees, Bali, Sheishu, Visat, Suchah, who are innocent people and who are envious people. Premu matri kripa upeksha yakaroti Samadhama. So a neophyte cannot understand who is God. So one of the devotees, he was explaining one day they went to meet the topmost saint of one of the sampradayas, bona fide sampradaya. There are four Sampradaya spiritual schools from which you can take perfect Vedic knowledge. So he went to this person who is taking care of one of the biggest temples of our country and bona fide Vedic lineage he belongs to. And he went to his house. There was a big frame of the deity and very devoted. But next to that there was frame of Sam Baba, who is regarded as God. And the devotee asked him that what is this? He could not ask. He asked in his mind. That why he has put this frame here. So he discussed gently that this, you know, God is there, Balaji is there. And now he has incarnated in the form of him. So then he told, what is this? Even a person who is supposed to belong to a bona fide Sampradaya and he does not have proper understanding of God. That God's description is given in the Vedas. When God is supposed to come, what are the activities? It is mentioned in the Vedas. The father's name, mother's name, the place of birth. All these things are predescribed. The time of birth. Everything is described. Nobody. There are special symbols, marks on palms, on the feet, soles and so many other qualifications are there. The descriptions are there. How you can take somebody who can show some little magic as God. So people do not know just like you go to the tribals little magic you show they will surrender UGA buga and you are God so they have no knowledge. So in a similar fashion, those people who are Kanishthadikari, they cannot clearly understand who is God. Anybody tells I am incarnation and they will start worshipping. Yogis can become so powerful. And just like the description is given of the great sage Vishwamitra so one king was there and this king wanted to go to heaven. So it is told. Many people tell we all want to go to heaven but we don't wish to die. So if you want to go to heaven, you have to die without taking pain of death. You want to go to heaven? That is not possible. But this king, he requested that he requested vashist first of all, who was responsible for guiding the king of that kingdom? That please, by your power, please make me elevated to heaven without death. He told that is not possible. That is not the Vedic regulation in next life in this life you perform your duties nicely next life you can be elevated. So then he went to Vishwamitra. Vishwamitra had kind of some competition, one sided competition with Vasist. So he told if I approach him and tell him Vashisht has denied you can do it so he can attempt this thing. He went to Vishwamitra and Vishwamitra by his power he made him rise to the heavenly kingdom. And then Nindras saw how you are coming. Without qualification he made him fall down. But then Vishwamitra, he created different planetary system for him. So just imagine that the sages, the Yogis can be so powerful what to speak of ordinary things they can create planetary systems also and so many other things he could perform the feats. So today if somebody comes like that they would immediately surrender telling you are God so a person who is new fight, he will not have any understanding he will surrender to anybody and waste his life. So he cannot understand who is God. But madhya madhikari. He can understand. Who is God? And Tad Adhinashu he can also understand the different categories of devotees. So we discussed in the previous session you can refer to Nectar of Instruction verse number three how we have to do Satsang satsang is important. Durula Bhumana janama Satsangay, taro HOA bhavasindhuri this material world we can cross over by Satsang, by right association of the devotees. How to have the association six principles how practically we have to apply? We have discussed previously so these principles of Satsang or association should be done with the advanced devotee but a person who is a neophyte he cannot understand who is advanced devotee who is this thing? For him everybody may be devotee the demon is also a devotee so we have to understand no a person can be worshipping any other devi Devata also just like Hirana Kashyapu was very very rigorously worshipping brahma Ramana was. Worshipping Lord Shiva but they cannot be considered spiritualist saint sadhu devotees. But now if a person goes and sees oh he's worshipping very devotedly his deity oh he could be a demon. So only a Madhya madhikari he can understand who is devotee, who is non devotee and on which platform this devotees he is very elevated devotee. He is also intermediate and he is neophyte devotee. This Madhya madhikari can understand and then Madhya madhikari also can see. These people are innocent simply by wrong association. They do not have knowledge of Krishna and these people are envious. So thus he behaves differently with these different personalities ishwarathad Adhineshu Bali she is God. He makes him as the love of his life. He dedicates himself and matri six principles of satsang friendly dealings. He engages himself with the devotees and those people who are innocent. He tries to educate them in Krishna consciousness. Now this thing is very important. So we may be doing so many things in Krishna consciousness. We can be chanting Hari Krishna Mahamantra very nicely. We can be chanting 16 rounds. Prabhupada told if you chant 16 rounds every day, that takes just 2 hours. 2 hours. Many people now there's a new trend now. All the youngsters, they want to go to gym. Few years ago nobody was going. But now this is also competition. Nature is pushing us to hard work forcing you to work very hard. So 2 hours every day they spend in gym but then this body goes away take up another but 2 hours if you give in chanting Prabhupada told and follow four regulative principles no power in the world can stop you from going back to God in making your spiritual life perfect. But a person can be chanting 16 rounds nicely. He could be chanting even 64 rounds or whatever. But if he does not behave as per the description given in this 11th, canto this verse of Bhagavatam pray muthri kripa. He does not show kripa to the innocent people. He does not preach this message of Krishna consciousness. He remains Prakrita. He remains a neophyte devotee. Thus this preaching is very, very important. Unless a person is doing preaching there is no question of elevating. So Madhya Madhikari is a preacher because Madhya Adikari has got knowledge anybody who has knowledge if you have knowledge that this is the vaccine, I found it if you take it, you will become very happy. Naturally, a person would like to share to everybody if you have got knowledge that this nice restaurant is there very nicely, they serve you automatically you would do publicity. So any knowledge if you are there, you are convinced about the knowledge automatically you would speak about it. That is a natural thing. So if you are not speaking means you do not have knowledge. But Krishna consciousness is so nice. So Prabhupada tells that is the difference between material and spiritual life. In material life you have to first qualify yourself, work very very hard, take all the degrees, internship, practice everything and when you are qualified, then you can become judge. You will be allowed to sit on the seat of the judge. But in spiritual life you start sitting on the seat of the judge and all qualifications will follow automatically. So that is why that is called sadhana bhakti. So even though we do not have very advanced knowledge, whatever knowledge we have in our life, we start sharing with others. Then automatically we get elevated to the platform of knowledge simply by doing this activity of sharing. So this is very very important. It is mentioned in the vedas that in order to rise to next level so a person can take initiation ordinarily a person who takes deeksha so a neophyte when he is after chanting the holy names of Krishna sufficiently. He's purified intelligent enough. He decides that I have to now take shelter of a guru spiritual master and formally taking shelter of guru in order to elevate yourself to second platform. Madhya madhikari. That is called diksha. Diksha means divya ganam yato daddyat so divyam gyanam transcendental knowledge is given the spiritual knowledge. It cannot be taken without the sanction of the spiritual master and kuriyat Papasi sang shayaha so the papa the past sinful life because of which the person suffers all those sinful activities are taken away. So we are suffering only because of bad activities of previous life. So all those things are taken away because of those activities we have to keep on taking newer bodies. So all those things past karma is taken away by the spiritual master. Disciple is relieved and spiritual knowledge is given to him. That is called the process of deeksha. So when a person takes deeksha, then he gets spiritual knowledge and he is considered madhya madhikari if he starts teaching that knowledge, two things are required to come to second level. First is take deeksha and Prabhupada mentions you can read in this nectar of instruction he should work very sincerely in the service of spiritual master by preaching, by spreading this knowledge. So when a person has taken diksha, he has surrendered himself to spiritual master to get educated in spiritual life. So spiritual master should not be accepted for fulfilling any material desires. Just like if you go to a scientist and the scientist, if he's a genuine scientist, he realizes you have come to him so that you can get just a job, he will be disappointed and if he knows oh, this person sincerely wants to understand subject, he also wants to do research, he would be very very happy. In a similar fashion, it is told in the vedas tasmat guru prapadhyata Jagyasu shreya uttamam only if you are very very inquisitive about God, about spiritual life, you should go to a guru not for material benefits but most of the people today, they approach a guru for material benefits. So then for such a person approaching Guru is not required. You approach any other person, some other materialist or motivational speaker they will tell you businessman how to gain material profits but don't approach Guru for that. Guru means only for spiritual inquiry. You should approach he's a spiritual teacher. So this is very important. If you want to come to second level then we should take diksha surrender completely through spiritual master. Spiritual master takes all the sinful reactions upon him of the disciple and he takes charge I will liberate you in this life. And then he engages himself in so Prabhupada explains very nicely that this is the first installment of Krishna consciousness that you get what is the first installment? Chaito Dharpanamarjanam bhavamah dhavagni Nirvapanam so there is agni in this world. So the fire, the turmoil now we are suffering from COVID fire and now some tornado or some winds also this is another fire. They are also creating disturbance and like this disturbances keep on happening. So many fires our heart is burning from so none of the things of the material world disturb a devotee. So this is the first installment person comes to liberated platform. So how will come to liberated platform? These people generally miss out. They think simply by chanting Hare Krishna mahamantra, I can come to liberated Platform simply. If I keep on reading Bhagavad Gita very nicely, I will come to liberated. Yes, it will happen. But it needs pure chanting and ordinarily in Yuga, we do not have that qualification that simply by this process we can elevate ourselves to that Platform. So what is the secret? The veda is still the secret. So I'll share what Srila Prabhupada explains about this process. This is a secret which we apply in our life very easily we can become so Prabhupada explains by getting absorbed in serving. So our real life is spiritual life not this bodily conception of life. So this is not a real life. Just like in dream we imagine a life that is not reality. Similarly this also is not reality. Real life is spiritual life. Now we are forgetful of that because of bodily concept. Narutam Das Thakur says that anyone who is above the bodily conception of life he is liberated person dehasmriti nahiyar sansar bandhan kahatar dehasmriti I am this body, I am Indian, I am American, I am Brahmana, I am Kshatriya. These are bodily conception of life. One who forgets this bodily conception of life he is liberated. So how we can forget bodily conception of life? Now Prabhupada is telling anybody who forgets this bodily concept he is liberated. How to do it just like one big person. Sometimes we have seen practically we have of course heard. We have not seen that. Prabhupada quotes Mr. Stalin, the great communist leader. He was to undergo a surgical operation of the intestine. So the physician, the doctor surgeon he wanted to give him an aesthetic chloroform. He refused. There is no need of let the operation go on. I shall see what is there within the belly. Strong minded here even in material conception he underwent the surgical operation without any chloroform. So that is possible. So Prabhupada is feeling just see in this world also that is possible. So Stalin was so much absorbed that this communism will make people happy. This is the way. People have not known this way of governance for so long. Now I have to spread. He was always planning thinking how to spread this communism. And absorption in such thought made him so much powerful that he was not disturbed by the disturbances of the body. He underwent surgical operation without any chloroform. So that is possible. If one is fully absorbed in Krishna consciousness then he has no more bodily conception of life. That is not to be imitated. It is on the highest stage. It is possible to forget completely. And he is liberated. He is no more conditioned by the material nature. How can it be possible? It is possible. I have already given one crude example why Mr. Stalin could tolerate without any trouble because he was a leader. He was always absorbed in the thought of how he could advance a communist cause. This is the real reason. Similarly if we take our cause very seriously, what is our cause? That is explained by Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Are. This Krishna consciousness movement is meant to serve Krishna. That is explained by Srila Rup Goswami. So what is our cause? So our cause is Krishna consciousness. His cause was communism. Our cause is engaging in service of Krishna. So Srila Rup Goswami explains how a person can be liberated even in this life. Sometimes people ask that Prabhu, are you liberated or who is liberated? So how to understand a person who is liberated in this material world? In spiritual world everybody is liberated. But here also before death we can be liberated. And what is the understanding? rUK goswami explains. This is how you can detect ya IHA Hare DaSy Karmana Manasagira nikhilaswapi avastasu Jeevan Mukta Sachate that person is called Jeevan mukta liberated even while in this body. Who is liberated? Ya IHA who in this material world? Hare DaSy who is engaged in as das as servant of Hari how he is serving Hari Karmana Manasa Gira karmana means by his actions. So Prabhupada told Arjuna was not sitting in a Yogic trance on the battlefield of Kurukshetra. Yes, Krishna, I will meditate upon you. No, but he was the most advanced spiritualist. Thus Bhagavad Gita was spoken to Arjuna, not to any yogi sitting in the Himalayas. They are not qualified. So they are on intermediate platform. Those yogis also but most advanced person. He uses his energy in the service of Krishna. He fought for Krishna so Karmana but along with that using his actions in the service of Krishna manasa mind also should be engaged in the service of Krishna. How can I satisfy in fulfilling the mission of Krishna in thinking of Krishna and Gira gira means speech words also should so words are used in the service of Krishna. Mind is absorbed in satisfying Krishna service of Krishna. And actions are engaged in service of Krishna. Any person who is engaged in this way in this material world he is Jeevan Mukta. He is liberated even now. But here also it is not very clear. Yes Prabhu. We serve Krishna very nicely. And we do Chapanbog offerings to Krishna every Sunday. And we are doing so many other things. And we are changing dresses of Krishna very very nicely. Four dresses in a day we change and like this. So what is serving Krishna? What is serving Krishna? That is explained by Krishna. I am quoting Prabhupada. We can see and Prabhupada is quoting. So this is parampara. We don't manufacture anything. Simply we quote what God has spoken or in the parampra we are receiving knowledge. So what is actually service of Krishna? We can see from his practical behavior Acharan not only his Acharan behavior but later on his incarnation chaitanya Mahaprabhu's Acharan or behavior, what is that? To spread Krishna consciousness. Krishna also came for the same purpose. To spread Krishna consciousness. Yaidam Paramam, Gohyam, Madh, Bhakteshwa Vidhasyati and Chaitanim Prabhu also came for the same purpose. So if we follow their footsteps and be fully engaged in spreading Krishna consciousness then immediately we become liberated. So Krishna, why does he come here? He mentions in Bhagavad gita yada yadahi dharmasya Glanir bhavati bharata abhyuthanamadharmasya. When people forget Dharma, dharma means the codes instructions given by Krishna by which people can make their life perfect. And what is that instruction? Mana Bhavad bhakto. Always think of me. Become my devotee. This is the perfection of life. So when people forget this, Krishna comes to reestablish this Dharma. And Chaitany Mahaprabhu, when he came, he also told his mission was same thing. Bharat Bhumila janmalahilayar janmasartha kari Karparovkar. So make your life successful by offenseless, chanting deity worship and Karparovkar. Then you preach Yaradeko tarikaho Krishna obdesh. Wherever you find any person simply preach him about Krishna consciousness. So this is the mission of Krishna. Spreading this knowledge as Krishna, as Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, this was his mission always. So thus this is the actual service, higher service of Krishna. If a person does not feel enlightened enough then he has to chant holy names very very nicely here. Very attentively offenselessly and very rigorously engage in deity worship. By rigorously doing deity worship and chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra offenselessly a person will naturally feel like preaching. But then this preaching absorbing ourselves. So this Prabhupada gives the clue. This is the secret. Unless a person engages himself in this way in now in this circumstances simply doing deity worship or simply making a show of chanting it is not possible to chant like Haridas Thakur entire day. So Prabhupada told why you are there now. Young you preach very nicely Krishna consciousness. And when you are old, then you may settle in Vrindavan and chant very nicely entire day and night without interruption. But unless you have priests sufficiently while you are young, at the old age you will not be able to chant because mind will agitate so much. So thus a person should engage himself very nicely in he should absorb himself how you should absorb just like Stalin. So just imagine the leader of communism who has made the biggest countries communist. What would be his thought? He is so much absorbed he is undergoing surgery without chloroform so this much if a person is absorbed how to spread Krishna consciousness? How to spread Krishna consciousness? For spreading you need to be empowered so you will chant nicely you will be very regular in Sadhana and this way when a person is always thinking absorbed in the thought how can I spread Krishna consciousness? Then he forgets the body and he becomes liberated material things do not disturb him so this is the key factor this preaching absorbing and not just some preaching absorbing oneself how to spread how to spread just like a businessman is absorbed how to expand my business? He goes to this country. That country, this city, that city. In this way, a person should be absorbed. This is the way to make advancements. Especially now, in this age of yuga. This is the instruction of Krishna. This is the instruction of Chaitanyma prabhu and all the bona fide acharyas. Then a person comes to madhya Madigari platform and when he preaches in this way, he is liberated. And he continues to satisfy Krishna by his rigorous offenseless. Chanting and preaching activity offenseless chanting is also very important. Unless a person chants offenselessly, he cannot rise this rung of krishna consciousness. He cannot come to madhya madhikari preacher or he cannot go to highest level uttamadikari but this chanting offenseless. Chanting will happen when a person is absorbed in thoughts of preaching, spreading Krishna consciousness and by chanting offenselessly and absorbing oneself in thoughts of Krishna consciousness, person is able to elevate himself on the highest platform. And that is called uttam adhikari. And what is the symptom of uttam adikari? Uttam adhikari has very strong faith in Krishna and he is very very well versed in the scriptures. Madhyam adhikari may not be very well versed in scriptures but he's having a strong nishta faith. But uttam adikari he can quote he is very well versed in the scriptural knowledge also and uttam adikari he is able to see Krishna always within his heart, every moment and he is always absorbed in spreading Krishna consciousness. And such an uttamadikari who every moment is conscious of Krishna. He's seeing Krishna within his heart. And a very unique qualification which is given in nectar of instruction is he does not feel at all to criticize anybody in this world. So now we are very fond of criticizing. This is what we see in the news, in the media. In the discussion on the social media everybody is criticizing somebody. But a pure devotee he does not feel at all to criticize anybody. This is the special qualification of pure devotee of uttamadikari. And such an uttamadhikari who is completely devoid of the propensity to criticize others who is seeing Krishna every moment in his life that person should be accepted as one spiritual master. Spiritual master should not be from Madhya Madhikari or from Kaneshta Dikari platform. We can accept them but we will also remain on the same platform. We will not be able to advance much and sachan uttamadikari. He is beyond the laws of nature. Physical presence or absence is immaterial. He always guides the disciples personally even after he has left his body physically. Life after life he shares the eternal bond with the disciple. Unless the disciple is liberated, he keeps on coming and trying to liberate that disciple. So such an uttamadhikari we need to find. We will be able to understand who is on that platform. When we come to Madhya Mathikari platform, then we'll be able to understand oh, he is advanced devotee. He is intermediate devotee. So give respect to everybody. We should not be disrespectful. General living entities also should be seen as temples of Krishna. Because Krishna is seated in the heart and anybody who's chanting the name of Krishna is much more advanced. As soon as we see anybody whose tongue is chanting the names of Krishna even occasionally we should offer respects in the mind. And anybody who has taken initiation from spiritual master doing very nicely deity worship physically he should be offered obeisances. So as soon as you see any devotees who have taken deeksha physically we fall on the ground and we offer obeisances. And those who are uttamadikari. The 6th kind of association which we have discussed in previous verse that should be done with uttamadikari completely surrendering ourselves accepting him as spiritual master. In this way different dealings are there in the material world and dushatsu some people would be envious in this material world. We should not preach them. We should not hate them, criticize them, remain indifferent. Somebody immediately becomes angry hearing the name of God. Don't worry about them. Many innocent people are there, preach them. So chant offenselessly and absorb yourself. In spreading this knowledge we come to Madhya Madhikari. Then we'll be firmly convinced oh, he's pure devotee and I should surrender, offer myself completely to his service. And then by such an association of uttamadhikari a neophyte also can raise himself to the uttamadikari platform which is the aim of the human form of life. Then only we'll be feeling the bliss for which we are hankering life after life. So with this we will end the session. And now we have a very special kirtan for all of you. So all of you please try to hear very nicely and try to repeat also. After hearing the way the singer is singing. So each and every word try to hear and try to repeat. And after this kirtan we will take up some questions. If anyone has Christian they know what I think I can't and I take this. Are they dumb all day, all day for it. Why? Holiday money snow honey, honey know how they keep somebody get something on it I'm a honey nam it. Honey honey honey honey honey kissed up honey kissed up honey, honey honey kiss somebody it on it's all day and I know what is I wanna say. I did not know what if I wanna I take my name. When it I know what it's all they want. I know it. I know. I think it's Holy Ghost know day. I know you om honey honey, honey. I love it what they call it. It all Hare Krishna. I hope all of you enjoyed the nice kirtan. Now let us take up the questions. All others also can start posting in the chat. This is by Ram Agrawal. When a devotee is supposed to come out of material world then why do we decorate our deity in Iscon with lots of jewelry and designer clothes? What is the purpose of decorating our deity in ISKCON? Nice question. So I suggest you can read a book. Science of Self Realization by Srila Prabhupada. And you can very easily find in Prabhupadbooks.com is the website or Prabhupada IO. All the Prabhupada books are there. Science of Self Realization. So please read that and all these concepts would be cleared. So Krishna, when he comes here as we discussed in the temples he is standing that is called Archa Vigraha. It is told in the scriptures. Arche Vishnu Shiladhir guru Shunar Matir If a person thinks Archie Vishnu Shiladhir that it is Shila, it is stone. The deity in the temple Dharch Vigraha Narki Saha that person is to be taken as resident of hell. That is very offensive mentality. Just like Krishna takes a form which appears like a man or like a tortoise or like a snake, krishna can take any forms. He takes a form which appears like stone but that is not stone. So that is why Krishna comes here and gives us opportunity to decorate him. And thus we offer best of the things to him. So this is the way to liberate yourself by developing attachment to Krishna. If a person does not develop preeti strong love and affection for Krishna, it is not possible to avoid dehyoga combination with the body life after life. So thus, in order to develop love for Krishna, krishna agrees to accept all our offerings in the form of bhoga food items, various dresses and decorations. Next question is Diksha or initiation important to attain Gologdham just by chanting Holy names and following four regulative principles? Can one attain spiritual world by chanting Holy Names and simply following four regulative principles without diksha will not give any result other than mitigation of material miseries. So it is not that any process will take you back to Godhead. Back to Godhead? Going back to Krishna can only be attained by mercy of Guru and Krishna. So Krishna gives the power of attorney of giving mercy to the conditioned souls, to the spiritual master. Just like the water is given by the ocean through the clouds, and thus the forest fire is extinguished. So spiritual master is compared to cloud which takes the mercy of Krishna. But now spiritual master has the power to discharge that mercy or water at his own will. So satisfaction of spiritual master is the way to go back to Godhead. So, spiritual master, the Acharyas have told you chant 16 rounds follow four principles. That is why we are able to make our life successful by following this process. If they tell you chant two rounds, that will make life successful. If they tell chant 64 rounds, that would make our life successful. It is a satisfaction of spiritual master. Please understand this important point. So thus, without diksha, without surrendering yourself to spiritual master. I agree. I follow you completely. How is it possible to make any advancement? So it is not possible to make any spiritual advancement without deeksha. Next is by atul Haldankar. Does Sanatana Dharma support evolution theory? Sanatana Dharma does not support evolution. Sanatana Dharma only taught evolution. And it is teaching evolution to the entire world. People were not aware, but it is not exactly like today's evolution theory. What we understand given by Charles Darwin as evolution of body, that your body is changing. He's telling there was steam engine, steam engine running, running one day transformed into diesel engine. And diesel engine one day automatically adjusted itself so nicely it became electric engine. That is rubbish. How is that possible? And if diesel engine is able to transform itself automatically into an electric engine, then how great designer will it be who has invested intelligence in the machine itself to transform? So, in any case, we need an intelligence behind the design. If the machine is itself able to transform, somebody has invested the intelligence in the machine. Or somebody has anyway. That is not possible. I am just putting for argument's sake. So it is not that coal engine became diesel engine, it became electric engine. No, the driver, the pilot, he left this engine entered another thing. We left our old car. Old vehicle. We purchased a new vehicle we could afford. This is the evolution which is recommended in the Vedas. Not that bodies are changing, but the soul is evolving in its consciousness. And the more we improve our consciousness, the better body we receive. And when the consciousness is perfectly evolved, we are Krishna conscious. We receive a body like Krishna which is completely spiritual. There is no birth, death, oldish disease in that body. This is the evolution what the vedas Sanatana Dharma they recommend. Next is by Rituja Talekar radhe Krishna. Pranam prabhuji radhe Krishna. I pray to Lord Vishnu but I have no guru. I pray as per my knowledge. How and where can I get guru who will actually guide me on the right path of Sri Narayan. So this is very nice. That is why you have now come in contact. So Srila Prabhupada is such an extraordinary acharya. So many lives he has transformed. So just see if you can accept him as spiritual master. At least I am assured of this. He's a bona fide spiritual master. So when a person Krishna sees, he is nicely dedicated to him. He sincerely wants to approach Krishna from the heart. He guides him to spiritual master and spiritual master. Then he takes the disciple to Krishna face to face. So Krishna, very kindly he has guided you. And now you can use your intelligence not accepting blindly. And try to see if you can put your faith in Prabhupada and accept him as spiritual master. Next is by Ajay Lakshya Chaturvedi. Hare Krishna. Prabhu dhanvat pranam hari Krishna. How to surpass the doing mentality? Please, please explain. So Prabhupada explains. Solve this mentality. Two processes are there. Simply chant offenselessly and engage nicely yourself in the preaching work. And then everything would be revealed automatically. All the doing mentality will go away. Next is by Ajay Raj Sharma. How can we experience Krishna in distress and pain? How to keep our hope alive in difficult times? Association of devotees without devotee association, there is no question of any further advancement. Now which kind of devotee to associate with that we have discussed today. And for more information please you can see previous session six principles of Satsang. So just always keep association with devotees and everything will be intact. We will be advancing in our faith. Next is by Lahari. Prabhuji is Radharani and Goddess of Fortune. Same. Radharani is the origin of all goddess of fortune. Just like Lord Krishna is the origin of all the Vishnu forms. So there are unlimited goddess of fortunes or Lakshmis. And all such lakshmis are emanating from Srimati Radharani. Next is by Tripti chakravarti. Hare Krishna. Prabhuji, hare Krishna. What is the process of deity worship? So you can kindly contact some devotees and there are some rules and regulations. They will instruct you in this process. But in our stage, very easily we can do it. Krishna is non different from his form. So any picture of Krishna, we can keep in a clean place in our house. And it is very simple. Offer some flowers. Flowers are available. Offer incense, offer lamp. There are other things. As much as possible you can do. But minimum flower, incense and some lamp that we can do very nicely. At least once in a day we can do. Or twice in a day. Twice in a day or six times in a day. As much as possible you can do. But don't reduce the standards once you have established. So try to offer. These things start once in a day and as time permits you can do it more. And then you can do some offerings to Krishna. Whatever food you cook in the house which is without onion, garlic, ideally everything should be without it. Keep in front of Krishna with a leaf of tulsi and then take it out and then you eat it and Krishna becomes very satisfied. So these things everybody can implement offering lamp, incense, flowers, three items are not there any one item you can do? Start with that and offering some food items. Food item is not there. Fruit you offer, milk, you offer, water, you offer something. Offer every day to Krishna. In this way we can all start deity worship. Next is by Rohit Bhalirao what is chanting offenselessly? So we'll be sharing here the link of ten offenses against the holy name. So please try to contact the devotees and we'll be sharing our email address also. So any further queries are there. Because spiritual life is a very scientific affair, very systematic training is required. So please to apply all these things. Here we are discussing principles how practically we have to apply in our life. We have to do under the guidance of expert devotees who have been following implementing in their life also. So you can contact on this email ID we are sharing and then we'll put you in touch with some of the devotees to get proper guidance. Vinita Sarkar how do we know that we are doing the deity worship? Yeah, please contact the devotees, they will help you. Rohit Bhale Rao can we become uttamadikari by simply chanting in this life? Very very rare, very difficult now. So we ourselves contest. So can we chant entire day without doing any job? Simply whatever body requires minimum thing, we have to sleep those many hours. Minimize it, minimize your eating and entire day simply keep on chanting, chanting, chanting day after day continuously without doing any other activity. Satatam Kirtayantoma. Is it possible? So that is not possible usually in Kalyuga so that is why the recommended process is simply try to satisfy the spiritual master by engaging in the preaching mission, preaching service very nicely. By this we will get very fast spiritual advancement in the life. So yes we'll become uttamatikari. It's a fact by chanting. But that actually offenseless chanting hearing will develop only when we preach very nicely. Prabhupada explains unless somebody is very experienced preacher, he cannot chant offenselessly holy name of Krishna. Next question is by Som Sri Rajak. What is the first step for Neophyte to reach Madhyam? Next stage chant and hear very attentively offenselessly holy name of Krishna and engage. First step is this second step is very nicely engage in deity worship and then start preaching. These three steps we follow and then we come to Madhya Madhykadi platform. Next is by Archana Sinthil Kannan Prabhu. I am aspiring for initiation. But in my place Toronto, there is no Hare Krishna movement temple. Please guide on how can I get initiation. So you have to be little careful in Hare Krishna. Also there could be some temple which may not be exactly following the right process. So please contact that email ID is there. We'll connect you with some devotees over there. And next is by Manasi agrawal. Hare Krishna Prabhuji Dhanvak Pranam, thank you so much for this beautiful session. Most welcome. How can we be engaged in offenseless chanting so we are sharing the link we have shared. I think already. Please visit read those ten offenses every day and take guidance of devotees how to avoid them in our life. Next is by Pooja Kushwaha. What to do for accepting Srila Prabhupada as your spiritual master? Is there some ritual to be followed? Prabhuji, please guide. Yes. So spiritual master also tests the disciple because it's a very serious affair. Spiritual master is going to be responsible for all the sins that we commit. Past sinful life he will take on himself plus future. If we commit sins, that also goes to spiritual master and he suffers for us. So it is very serious affair. So that is why the disciple is monitored. If he's fixed up in following the rules and regulations very nicely which he's supposed to follow post initiation, is he knowledgeable enough or that blindly he has accepted spiritual master. Tomorrow he can leave. So written examination, interview and all these things are there. And so you can please use that email ID and we'll connect you with some devotees. They will guide you towards the initiation procedure. Next is by Kanoja Kanojiya Kanojiya Kanojiya. Hare Krishna Prabhuji. Hare Krishna I offer my respectful obeisances unto you all. Glories to Srila Prabhupada. If any person in Kaneshta Dikari stage does Krishna itself take care personal care of that person so he should not deviate. Yes, Krishna takes care by giving him the association of devotees. Now it is up to Him. So Krishna is always taking care of us at every step. But we don't listen to Krishna. So that is why he manifests himself as spiritual master. He sends a spiritual master. He gives instructions in the form of Bhagavad Gita. So thus in order to understand have protection of Krishna, we should read Bhagavad Gita. We should go to spiritual master and live in association of devotees. They will give Krishna's protection to us. So we should not think that Krishna is there in my heart. From my heart he will protect me. No, this Krishna does not expect neither we can follow the instructions of Krishna. From Dharakrishna has clearly told how to protect yourself in this material world. Tadviddeep Pranipate humbly approach a guru who is tatvadarshi and engage in his service and inquire from Him about me. In this way you will be protected in this material world. Next question is by Sahil Sharma Hare Krishna prabhu, as you mentioned, that preaching needs to be done to advance in Krishna consciousness. But how to deal with the apprehension of abandoning by the people or by relatives and friends? But why they would abandon? Because preaching does not mean that you have to go somewhere. Rather they should be the first people. You should try to preach because they have credibility. You are their relative, you would not cheat them and they know you. So that is why our friends and family, those are the first people we should try to preach and help. And Krishna consciousness is pretty logical. And the best way of preaching is to give them books. Because we may not be able to explain. Even if we explain, they will forget. If a book goes eternally, they will read, take benefit and be on the right path. So put them in association of devotees, give them books. In this way try to preach your friends and family the first. And somehow if some friends are very very envious some family members do not at all want to listen. Their association can be avoided. Hare Krishna. Prabhuji. This is by H Pandey, my ten years daughter's. Query here. How can we believe and realize that God is there? Very nice question. So it is very very simple. So this lecture you are watching maybe on a phone or on computer. So as soon as we see a phone or as soon as we see a computer immediately we can understand there is a designer. We may not know who is the designer, but there is a designer. Because computer, can it come on its own? Can the phone come on its own? The dust particle and some mud, some rains, they combine together. After millions of years of evolution this smartphone has appeared or this computer has appeared. It is not possible, right? Very simple understanding. So when this small computer which is on our palms or on our table cannot appear on its own by assembly automatically or evolution, how can this wonderful machine which hosts a computer, this brain is a computer which can make many, many computers. This body is a machine which can create similar machines. Have we manufactured any such machine? Any laptop which can create laptop? There is male laptop, female laptop. You bring them together a new laptop, you get wow, no, we don't have any such technology. But here this technology is there. So just see. So such ordinary machines cannot appear on their own. And what to speak of this machine? And when your daughter, she studies more then she can understand that every cell the body has got many cells. And every cell is more complex than the New York City in its rush hour. Can a city come on its own? And the scientists are telling every cell is more complex than a metro city also. So how can it come on its own? All this was not known earlier. So thus all these evolution, other things were coming. Now they are getting discarded so it is very very simple. No small machines can come on their own how such a wonderful machine brain can come assemble on its own and the creator is God. Now who is God? How shall we understand? This is also simple so just like your daughter has knowledge of her grandfather or great grandfather he might not be alive but how she has knowledge? Because you are passing them so who is the father of the great grandfather? How to get knowledge? No science can work who was father father? Father of great grandfather eight generations ago no science can help so in parampara in family lineage we can get the knowledge. So 2345 generations ago we cannot understand who was our great grandfather. What to speak of the original father so this knowledge has been passed down. God gave knowledge to his son he gave knowledge to his son he gave knowledge to his son in this way this is called parampra. This parampra is the way of understanding who is God. Next question is by Yashoda Prakash hare Krishna prabhuji any example of persons in stage of uttamadhikari in the present age of Kalyuga other than scorn devotees we will never know because uttamadhikaris they may behave like a madman or they can behave like a child. This is the instruction. So we all want to behave very smart and then we attract some people and we get entangled. But the most advanced devotees they may live like animals or they may be there in the jungle they will never come to city or if at all they come they may be sitting just like a madman. So those who don't want to preach they need not assemble they need not associate with the general people and some preachers may associate and those people will never tell that I am an uttamadikari. However we have one such instance we know Srila Prabhupada is an uttamadikari so we can very easily surrender and take shelter of it but unless we are also on the platform we are sufficiently advanced we cannot figure out. Next is by Virendra Akbote how can I get rhythmic initiation in HK movement? So we have given the email ID please contact next question by Satish Kashyap Prabhuji what is the basis? You mean basic requirement of preaching how to start this process? So very nice question. The basic requirement for preaching is enthusiasm. This knowledge is so nice I am understanding it is very appealing it is scientific, it is helpful so whatever I've understood let me share with others. And Prabhupada told what your two minute preaching will do a person will hear and he will forget but you share these books with others if he reads one line, one page his life may take his life may turn around take a change. So thus please try to share these books as much as possible this literature as much as possible with others. So thank you so much for all your questions. Try to chant very nicely, very respectfully. Attentively Krishna is incarnated.