Hare Krishna. A very warm welcome to all of you. We have been discussing the shlokas from Nectar of Instruction updesh Amrita by Srila Rupa Goswami and all of these instructions are very important for implementation in our spiritual life. So as I request every time, if you have not started or if it is your first session of this series kindly, you can go through the book Nectar of Instruction ubdesh Amrita so internet is expected to give us perfect knowledge but unfortunately it has proved otherwise because now there are so many views. If you want to find out truth, it is so difficult you will find contradictory views about any topic. So it becomes very difficult to find out what is truth. Especially with this technology, anybody can morph the truth very easily. So everything becomes very deceptive. Where is the limit to research? But it is very important to understand what is fact, what is truth in life. So in order to understand what is good and what is harmful for us, there are two ways of knowing it. One thing is we can use our own intelligence and figure out which instruction should I follow? What is the right thing to do in life? Another thing is depend on some other person's mind. So any sane man would agree that any ordinary person is not expected to just depend upon the processing of one's own brain and one's own experience in life. So the Olympics are going on and what people have to do is nothing. But they have to simply do some jumps. They have to throw a few objects and just for throwing spears and balls and some other things or for some jumping, they have to be coached. They have to get a very very expensive coach just to push a ball here and there, just to run, just to make some maneuvers. So much money is being spent. So coach is very, very important. So any sane man would agree if I fall sick, I go to a doctor, I take help. I have to make house. I take help of civil engineer. So there are experts. We also can do it, but it will take a very long time. So when it comes to spiritual life, similar thing applies. One thing is a person can keep on doing independent research. That is also one way of doing it. But even material sciences, we cannot figure out what to speak of spiritual life. So it takes a very long time. Krishna tells Bahunam Janmanamante gyanvan mam Prapadhyante a person who is gyanvan, who is trying to understand what is truth, what is God, how to approach God it takes a very very long time to understand. Bahunam jan manam. How long time? Maybe 2030 years. 40 60 years. I can do that dedicate my entire life. No bahunam Jan Manam many, many births it will take. And then it is told there is another easy process. Ask somebody else who knows already. Now when you ask somebody else, then again there are two ways of doing it. You ask somebody who has known something again basis his own research. He might have gone through this research work for maybe many birds or many years more than us. So they may be more knowledgeable. But vedas are telling Srila Rupa Goswami is telling. That is not the way of knowing God. That is not the way of knowing absolute truth. Why? Because any conditioned living entity can never be sure of truth. Conditioned living entity like us who have bodies here. So we are designed to process this world in a conditioned manner. Pig will find stool tasty and we will find stool nasty. A sick man finds all the food bitter. So thus we cannot depend upon conditioned soul. So that is why if you are trying to find out truth with the help of a person who also has used just his own or her own brain and intelligence, sorry sir, we cannot rely on that. That is your perspective of truth. I want reality. So how reality can be understood? It is very simple. It can be taken directly from God, who is the manufacturer of everything, creator of everything. Maintainer and destroyer as well. Or we can ask a person who has received this instruction from God. Or a person who has taken this instruction from God. It is very simple. And this is called Guru Shisha Parampra. Krishna gave knowledge to his disciple. Disciple gave knowledge to his disciple. In this way this perfect knowledge comes down. So if we are in touch with such parampara in which the perfect knowledge is flowing from God, or if we are qualified enough, then we can directly approach God. But the perfect knowledge only God can give in life. So if we have access to such perfect knowledge, then life is solved. So people are involved of knowledge and coaching. Counseling is a big business. Especially online digital coaches. There are businesses to train coaches only. Everyone is trying to become coach. Because people are confused. They want knowledge. So suppose we have a book of perfect knowledge. Everything about the world is perfectly mentioned. We would be so fortunate. And actually we are. And those books are nothing but the Vedas. Vedic. Knowledge is nothing but the perfect knowledge given by God for the benefit of humanity. It is not necessary to suffer if we are living here on this planet. Here also we can be perfectly happy if we follow the instructions of God. So. How? Vedas are perfect. How this knowledge is coming from God? You can watch our session incredible Vedas part one and part two. To understand and get convinced that this knowledge is perfect knowledge given by God. However, one simple instance I can explain to you how we can put faith in this. So now we see that a disease is there around us. We are trying to find out medicine for this pandemic and so much research is going on and sometimes research is also not becoming successful and so is the case with every disease. So much research, so much of killing, so many trials on animals and then they figure out something seems to be working but most of the times we are unaware of the side effects or even if you know the side effects we do not know how to counter it, how to stop it and we just have a bargain. Okay let us solve this immediate problem and for after effects or side effects we will do something else. But if we see the medicine is also mentioned in the Shastras in Ayurveda for all these diseases now in history of the shastras you will never find any mention of laboratory, any kind of experiment, any kind of testing of some medicines there is no mention. So how somebody can make a medicine? If you tell anybody who is expert in the science of medicine that you please take a hit and trial attempt to come up with the medicine of a disease, he will tell it is crazy, how we can do that. So by hit and trial, nobody can find the medicine. So there are only two ways of doing it. Either you make repeated experiments, you do many, many tests, and it takes up to eight to ten years of tests, at times many, many years, usually to come up with one simple medicine. And those also get banned when we see the side effects. But Ayurveda does not ever deviates from its recommendation the same medicine which was being used and for generations people have used and now also they are using and they don't show any side effects. And how people came to know that you give this root of this tree, you give the leaf of this plant, flower of this plant. So how somebody can know that it is not hit and trial approach? So thus we can understand if there is no research work going on, there is no mention but what is the mention from where Ayurveda has come? It has come from Dhanvantiri, the incarnation of Lord Krishna who came here and gave us this knowledge of medicine science so that we can have a healthy life here. So this is the history as per the Ayurveda and people were not cheaters in Vedic times. Brahmana would die but would not tell a lie. Satyam shama dhamma. Various characteristics are there of a brahmana? So this community which would never tell lie, they would immediately reject such knowledge. So thus we can understand that there is no need of any research work. Still there are so many accurate medicines for so many diseases. So this implies this knowledge has come directly from God. And thus Vedas being part of a bigger suppose there is one medicine which proves to be harmful then people would become faithless on the Vedas. That if one thing can become wrong, then any other thing also can be wrong. But nothing has proved to be wrong. Stool is considered untouchable in the Vedas. But the stool of cow cow dung that is considered supremely pure in worship and various other procedures it is used for purifying the deities of Krishna God. They are also bathed in cow dung and cow urine that is so pure. And now people are analyzing scientifically. Also people would cook their meals in cow dung cakes that was used as fuel. So can you cook anybody's meal your chapati in dung cake, putting it over dung and can we eat it? No. So other dungs are septic. But cow dung is antiseptic. So like this if one thing proves wrong in Ayurveda then the Ayurveda is rejected and all other vedas are also rejected. But nothing in the Vedas has ever changed. Same recommendations. Not just for medicines, for everything, for transportation, for governance, for management. All the systems, varnashrama systems very nicely they have been laid down. And the civilization continued in such a nice balanced way for thousands and thousands of years. But then we wanted to depend upon our own experimentations. And then the result of that is all the great scientists of the century and previous century. They have realized what we have created. So we are bringing our own ruination. And this planet is on the verge of destruction. When we started experimentation using our own intelligence. So thus we are so fortunate. We have got amazing Vedic knowledge with us which has never changed. Because this knowledge is directly coming from God. So Srila Rupa Goswami is another such stalwart sage who is direct disciple of Lord Chaitanya who is none other than Lord Krishna himself who came here to give the highest process and the only process for spiritual advancement in this age. That is Harinam Sankitan. So Chathanimah Prabhu's immediate disciple Ruth Goswami has given us this Udeshamrita nectar of instructions. Eleven verses which a person has to apply practical in one's life. So we have been discussing all these important verses. Every verse is treasure house of knowledge. Seven verses we have discussed so far. Today we are going to discuss verse number eight. So in the previous verse, Rup Goswami explains Sri Krishna namacharita p Sitapi avidya. So name form activities of Lord Krishna. They are very very sweet. But pito. Pataptara Sanaro Chikanu A person who is having disease, he gets no taste in food. Similarly there is a disease. When the spiritual soul gets this material body this is a disease situation. Then it has to suffer from hallucinations of death, old age and disease. Because the soul thinks I am this body. So this is a disease situation. So those living entities who are living in disease situation like that they cannot relish the holy name of Krishna, the activities of Krishna. But then there is a solution. What is the solution? Kintwadharat Anudinam kalusai vajushta. By careful chanting of these names every day. Swad Vikramad Bhavatitad Gadamulhantri this disease is destroyed at the heart, at the root and the person understands I am not the body, I am part and parcel of Krishna. And the chanting of Krishna's name hearing of Krishna's names becomes very very nectarian. And when this thing happens then Srila Rup Goswami finally so gradually he has built up the spiritual life very nicely. These activities are supposed to be avoided. These activities should be done under whose guidance should be done? Which are the various kinds of spiritualists? Who is the topmost spiritualist? How to elevate oneself to that platform? What is the process after that? And then finally the essence he is giving. Tan namarupacharitadi sukhirta nanu smritiyo kramena rasana manasi neogia tishtan Rajay tad anuragi jananugami kalam nayed Akilam. Ithyopadesha Saram. This is upadesha. Saram. The essence of all advice or instruction, what is that? The essence of all advice is that one should utilize one's full time 24 hours a day in nicely chanting and remembering the Lord's divine name transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes thereby gradually engaging one's tongue and mind. In this way one should recite in Raja Golok Vrindavan Dham and serve Krishna under the guidance of devotees. One should follow in the footsteps of the Lord's beloved devotees who are deeply attached to his devotional service. So Srila Prabhupada explains since the mind may be one's enemy or one's friend one has to train the mind to become his friend. So in Bhagavad gita we have been discussing Buddhir Atmat manastasya atmayavaripur atmanah so once bandhur atmat manas tasya bandhu means friend. So mind can be one's friend or Atmayeva Ripur ripu means enemy. Atmanaha mind can become one's enemy or one's friend depends upon the training. So an untrained mind is worst enemy. This mind creates so many troubles, unlimited miseries in life. And a trained enemy is one's friend. And mind is carrying impressions from many many lives not just of this life. That is why Srila Prabhupada explains sometimes you are dreaming and in dream you are flying in the air. So how do you have this experience of flying? We never have experience of free flying or free falling. We can think in dream that I am falling from mountain. That mountain is not existing. But then sometimes we do experience that I am falling down. That touch of air, that feel of gravity free fall. How we are able to have this experience? How we are able to have experience of flying and falling? Because we have done this experience in some other bodies which can fly in the air. So this proves in this life we don't have such experience. If we are eating some sweet in dream we can only repeat the experience if we have done that before in this gross life. So thus in this life we don't have such experience of flying and falling. So how we are able to repeat that in dream we are able to replay it because that is stored in our consciousness, in our mind from previous births. So like this mind has got many many impressions and sometimes these impressions combine together and produce a very contradictory picture. So it is mentioned in Bhagavad gita whatever you may want to do in life the most important thing is there are various processes for other ages. Although in this age apart from Sankirtan there is no other process. Harirna meva kevalam kalao nasty v gataranyatha vedas are telling anybody who's telling any other process apart from chanting it is not supported by the Vedas for Kalyuga for this age. Kalao nastev. Kalyug nastev. Nastev. Nastev. There is no other process to be followed in Kalyuga. If you ask anybody, nobody will be able to show any line that this process is for Kalyuga. Because throughout the Vedas this reference is mentioned. However in other ages other processes were followed. Some people are following Sankhya, some people are following Ashtanga yoga. Some people would follow the process of Karma and so many things so it is told ETA van Sankhya Yoga Bhyam Sadharampari Nishtaya Janmalabha Parapunsam you are following Sankhya or Ashtanga yoga or Swadharamparin Nishtaya you are doing your duties very nicely. Karmakanda portion you are doing very nicely. And out of such activities you experience some benefit in your life. That could be association of people you like their love, their friendship or some name fame in the society XYZ some wealth, strength, power. So Vedas are telling the greatest benefit that one can derive by following any process doing your duties nicely sankhya or by following yoga the best result the greatest benefit is ante. Narayana smriti Janmalabha Parahapun Sam the greatest lab benefit is ante at the time of death you are able to remember Narayan otherwise this life is very risky at the time of death. Krishna has mentioned Yam Yamaran Bhavamaram this science is not known to people that whatever your consciousness is at the time of death same body you will attain in future. So if you have not trained your activities in a specific way then mind can produce any dangerous picture at the time of death and similar body one has to attain. That is why mind should be so trained that it cannot think of anything else but Krishna at the time of death. So some people are becoming very happy that yes I am very successful either in sports or in education or in their own respective fields. But Vedas are telling that is not the greatest benefit. Rather that is no benefit at all. Because you are eternal whatever you accumulate in this life that is temporary. That is not even like a moment. Because you will take another body another body in this way unlimited bodies you will keep on taking unless you transfer yourself to spiritual world where there is no more birth, death, old age and disease. So we need advanced mental knowledge, advanced sciences to figure out that there is a place beyond this universe also and that is not made up of matter but that is made up of spirit. There is no influence of time. Time was created. Time is also an energy. Time, space we know all these things the students of physics. So time and space are energies. And beyond the effect of space and time there is another world which is called spiritual world. So the vedas tell the ultimate aim of life is to transfer oneself to that spiritual world. Because there is no effect of time. So there is no old age, no disease and no death. That is a place where Creator God himself lives and invites everybody please come and live here with me. But our transference to any planet depends upon our consciousness at the time of death. That is why it is told in the vedas you should mold your activities every day in your life throughout that you are conscious of Krishna always. Thus naturally at the time of death mind will think of Krishna and the person transfers oneself to Gorindavan, a planet of Krishna. Therefore so this process of transmigration is very subtle. Therefore, Sri Rupa Goswami advises devotees to train their minds in order that they will be unable to remember anything other than Krishna. Similarly, the tongue should be trained to speak only of Krishna and to taste only Krishna. Prasad Srila Rup Goswami further advises tishthan Vrajay. So the advice is every moment should be utilized in this. Because every moment once it is spent for material upliftment in life it cannot be gained by spending any amount of wealth. Now Chanakya Pandit is telling swarna kotivi crores of gold coins you spend you cannot bring one moment back which you have spent for material advancement. In that moment you could have worked for your permanent advancement. That is spiritual life or material advancement. You are traveling. Our situation is like we are traveling in a railway coach. And all your money, all your intelligence and your time you spend simply in decorating the coach. And then you left that coach at destination. Then what is the use? All that money is waste. All that time is also waste. Similar thing is happening with us. Soul is transmigrating changing bodies every life. And we are wasting some moments here. Accumulating name, fame, money which anyway does not satisfy. We have seen no people who are famous, people who are powerful. They are also struggling with their lives. People having best of the brains. All India rank once with their best of the intelligence choose best of the fields and careers for themselves. But they remain dissatisfied. They try to choose best of the spouses with best of the profiles and with best of their ability. They fight tooth and nails. So they are not satisfied. So thus why to follow a path where there is dissatisfaction? However, it does not mean that one should become a Mandycant and live in jungle neither that is possible for people in Yuga. So whatever activities we are doing we dedicate the results of the activities for Krishna. Wherever you are in whichever job business we are we can continue at the same time. Every moment should be spent in chanting Krishna's name and remembering. So tongue should be trained and mind should be trained. So somebody asked Prabhupada so Prabhupada how do we apply this loca that always we have to be Krishna conscious always we have. So Prabhupada told yes you chant always but we cannot chant always. So Prabhupada told yes when you cannot chant then you can remember. There is no hindrance. So how to remember Krishna always it is very tough. So one of our devotees gave his personal experience that Prabhu I was also thinking that how we can always think of Krishna. But then I experienced a very sad phase in my life. I had a breakup and after breakup whatever I am doing whether I am sitting in my lectures or I am sweeping the floor I am doing daily chores. I am always remembering thinking of her, my friend. So thus we can see even a person can be completely absorbed in somebody's thoughts on material platform also. So the same thing is possible for Krishna. But this has to be done. Every moment of the day should be done in chanting and hearing this training we should do tongue is free. Keep on chanting always and taste only Krishna Prasadam. In this way tongue should be engaged in trained in constant engagement. And when it is not possible to chant there could be circumstances. So thinking should not stop. Thinking should continue at that time. And then when tongue is trained when mind is trained then another very important element Srilaru Goswami mentions tishthan Rajay Tad Anuragi. This is very important. So usually we think if I simply chant and hear Hare Krishna Mahamantra I know the process. Now I will offer Prasadam to Krishna and take it and I will chant and my life would be successful. No it will not be successful. It is not merely the process that brings us success. That is why next it is mentioned tishtan Vrajay. One should live in Vrindavan or any part of Rajibhumi rajbhumi or the land of Vrindavan is supposed to be 84 miles crochets in area one crochet equals 2 sq mi. When one makes Rindavan his residence he should take shelter of an advanced devotee there. In this way one should always think of Krishna and his pastimes. So there is a way in which Krishna's pastimes have to be thought of. So it is not possible unless one lives in Vrindavan. So Chattana Mahaprabhu out of 64 elements of devotional service Bhakti Yoga he has taken out five important elements which everyone must follow. And those five elements include living in Vrindavan, living in a holy place. It is very very important. One cannot do without it. One has to live if one wishes to make one's spiritual life perfect, these five elements cannot be neglected. However, if a person simply follows these basic practices these five things are not very difficult. Chanting and hearing holy names of Krishna, hearing Bhagavatam, having association of devotees, deity worship and living in holy place. Very simple. Anybody can do that. So if these five things are followed, spiritual life becomes successful very easily. But living in a holy place is very important. Tishtan Rajay and then what should be done? Tad Anuragi tad means from previous verse that Krishna is being connected. Tad Anuragi then in Vrindavan one should take shelter of a person who is having anurag strong attachment for Krishna. So attachment for Krishna cannot be generated without taking shelter of a person who has that attachment. You have to follow in his footsteps. He should take shelter of an advanced devotee there. In this way one should always think of Krishna and his pastimes. So living is important. And then taking shelter of a pure devotee is also important. This is further elucidated by Srila Rup Goswami in his Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu Krishnam Smaran Janam Chasya Prashtham Najasamihitam Tata Katha Ratash Chasa Ukuriyad Vasam Rajesada it means a devotee should always recite in the transcendental realm of Raja and always engage in Krishna. Smaran janam chase Tham. It means the remembrance of Sri Krishna and his beloved associates. So thinking of Krishna is liberating and thinking of Krishna's devotees equally liberating. So one Srila Prabhupada was explaining about Krishna consciousness explaining this very important point that this is a crux of everything that we do in our life to make spiritual life successful. That is, remember Krishna at the time of death. So one devotee asked that we do not know Krishna because they were westerners, they never heard of Krishna but they had faith when they heard Prabhupada. This is the influence of a pure devotee. So but we know you, we do not know Krishna. So it is difficult for us to think so at the time of death. If we do not think of Krishna, can we think of you? So Srila Prabhupada paused for a while. He closed his eyes and then he replied after a few moments yes, you can do that. That will have the same effect. So of course, a pure devotee wants to have a very humble position. But nevertheless when it is asked, it has to be explained. Remembrance of pure devotee is equally powerful as that of Lord Krishna. However, the recommended processes both should be meditated upon. So Krishna's worship is supreme that Lord Shiva tells to mother Parvati Aradhana Anam Sarvesham Vishnu Radhanam Param and then Lord Shiva further tells Tasmat Paratharam Devi Tadiyanam samarchanam greater than that is worship of devotee. Because to worship Krishna please him directly is very tough. But devotee becomes very easily pleased. And Krishna also gets pleased. Oh, he is showing so much respect to my devotee. And thus Krishna also tells Madh Bhakti shu pujya vyadika. So Bhakt and Krishna both should be thought of. So one should live in vrindavan should think of Krishna and his devotees, beloved associates. By following in the footsteps of such associates and by entering under their eternal guidance one can acquire an intense desire to serve the supreme personality of Godhead. So as we were discussing in Srila Prabhupada Leela if you have been watching that so I request all of you. You can please watch in order to absorb ourselves thinking of the pastimes of our spiritual master Srila Prabhupada. So Srila Prabhupada, how did he coin this word? Krishna consciousness. The society is called international society. For Krishna consciousness is gone. So this has come from Krishna Bhakti Rasabhavita. This word. It is also mentioned in Bhakti Rasamrita. Sindhu Krishna bhakti Rasabhavita. So what does it mean? So we are always hankering for some rust, some enjoyment. That is why a person works very very hard and spends all money not for himself but to take care of children. Parents or other family members, spouse XYZ or some animals like people are doing this thing taking care. So why? What happens when you do this? You get some Rasa out of it. When you take care of your children, when your children behave with you very nicely then you get a mellow. You relish that. And when you enjoy relationship with your other family members some mellows you derive out of it. And this mellow is so nice. Person is willing to sacrifice all his hardened wealth. But all these mellows do not satisfy us. Although that pleases for some time. But heart is always burning. So it is mentioned in the scriptures the highest Rasa of relationship or any kind of Rasa that we can experience is Bhakti Rasa. So the highest enjoyment in one's life is consciousness which is absorbed in this Bhakti Rasa and how it can be attained? Just like we are working hard sacrificing the resources for some people or animals same thing can be done for Krishna. It is very simple. Bhakti is very simple. Krishna is also a person. Same thing. When it is done for Krishna or spreading this mission of Krishna consciousness then a person can experience this very elevated consciousness that is called Krishna Bhakti Rasa Sabhavitamati. So is it so easy? Very easily I can attain this highest benefit of one's life. By watching a movie or by taking drugs. Everything gives us some kind of Rasa, some kind of pleasure and consciousness. So by spending some money you can afford even the costliest of the drugs and have that Rasa. So how we can purchase Krishna consciousness? Can we purchase some drugs? No, by drugs it cannot be brought about. So how we can have this consciousness? So it is explained by Rup Goswami please. If somebody is selling you this consciousness then you please purchase it somehow or the other is somewhere Krishnamati is being sold, please purchase it. Immediately. But what is the currency? How we can purchase it? It is told Tatra lalamapimulya may come intense greed to have it is the only cost that you can pay. Intense greed. But intense greed is not there in us. We have intense greed for some promotions in our job and business. We have intense greed to find the love of our life and marry them only do we realize later that now nothing is there that infatuation is gone. This intense greed does not arise for Krishna. That is a nature just like Pittopataptarasanasina Rochikanu. As long as we think I am this body such an attraction will not awaken in the heart. As long as lust and greed is there in the body which are the root cause of the disease. The more we engage in lusty affairs, in greedy affairs the more this disease becomes serious, the more strong becomes bodily concept of life, the more difficult it becomes to understand. I'm different from the body. I am spirit, soul. So that is why Rup Goswamitas purchase it immediately. But Janmukoti Sukriti for crores of life you keep on doing good activities. Still you cannot afford this. So it is mentioned in Bhagavatam how this can be afforded. It can be afforded by naisha matistavad urukramangrim spirishyati Anartha pagamu Yadhartha vina Mahatapad rajobi Sheikham Nish Kinchananam Navranita Yavat so this eagerness cannot be attained unless heart is freed from lust and greed. And heart cannot be freed from lust and greed unless one finds a person who is Nishkinchan kinchan means something. So we can understand. Yes, we should not become very greedy. But then we have some or the other hook in our life which pulls us to material enjoyment something. It is not easy to become completely free from the material desires. Some pull, some addiction, some habit we have some desire of enjoyment we have. So it is told there are some people who are Nishkinchan who do not have even a pinch of desire of material enjoyment. Why? Because they have attained this. Krishna mati. They are enjoying this Krishna consciousness. So it is told. So one has to find such a Nishkinchan person who has no material desires who is completely Krishna conscious and take the dust from his lotus feet and smear your entire body with the dust of their lotus feet. And as we have discussed previously, such devotees Nishkin Chanas they are eternal personalities. Their existence and their guidance does not finish when this body finishes. Thus it is told here every line should be read very carefully of these books. By following the footsteps of such associates who are tad anuragi who have got intense attachment for Krishna and by entering under their eternal guidance one does not enter under temporary guidance. If at all you get attached to some pure devotee you enter under their eternal guidance eternally they keep guiding you. Guidance does not stop because they are not limited by body. Body does not control them. They can use any ways and means to guide us. So they are existing on absolute platform. If we read the books of such anuragi people who are completely Krishna conscious they can guide through their books. Personal instructions will come to us which is suitable for our life at that point of time. So this is the existence of Krishna and his devotees. When we read Bhagavad Gita Krishna is personally giving the instructions to us as per our caliber. We are able to realize it. Similar is the case with pure devotees. So smearing oneself with the dust of the feet of devotees also means that completely and very strictly following the instructions that they give to us smearing completely smearing with daughter's feet means completely submerged in following the instructions. Not deviating at all from what they are teaching us. So in this way one has to take shelter of Tad Anuragi, a pure devotee of Krishna and reside in Raj Vrindavan. And then when this thing happens then by such seva done to a pure devotee of Krishna. When a person is very strict in following the instructions spirish Shatti Anarth Apagamo Yadharthaha Anarthas are washed away from the heart. Heart becomes very clean. And then intense eagerness which is a natural state of living entity. We are part and parcel of Krishna. Healthy man is naturally supposed to feel hunger. In a similar fashion we are naturally Krishna conscious and we feel intense attraction for God. But now we forget in this bodily concept. So such original pure state is awakened. So it is very important to take shelter of such pure devotees. And then what will happen? Eagerness to have Krishna will come and the more we have lust lust is gyna, vikyan and nashanam. If we engage in lusty activities then the desire to make spiritual advancement goes away from the heart. And if we reduce lust in our life by serving pure devotee we develop desire to advance in spiritual life. And when this eagerness becomes very very intense then we understand Krishna and not just understand Srila Prabhupada mentions. If you are serious in this life you can see Krishna face to face. It all depends upon one's eagerness. Again sri La Rup goswami states in Bhakti Rasamrita, Sindhu which is other exhaustive book. This is the basic book. Seva Sadhakarupena Siddharupayana Chatrahi tad Bhava lipsuna Karya Raja Lokanu Sarata in the transcendental realm of Raja Rajdham one should serve the Supreme Lord Sri Krishna with a feeling similar to that of his associates tad bhavalip Suna Karya and one should place himself under the direct guidance of a particular associate of Krishna and follow in his footsteps. This method is applicable both in the stage of Sadhana spiritual practices executed while in the stage of bondage like us and in the stage of Sadhya God realization. When one is asidhapurush or a spiritually perfect soul. So there are two kinds of service to Krishna. One kind of service that we do now that is called Sadhana Bhakti. Sadhana Bhakti is done to come to liberated platform. And what shall we do on liberated platform? Again we will do service of Krishna. This kind of service it liberates us. And then on Siddha platform. Liberated platform. When one serves Krishna then there is unlimited awakening of pleasure of the heart. However, in both the cases either the person is liberated knows his real identity within the body or he is living in the spiritual sky. Or when the person is conditioned by this body the process remains the same nowhere. It is mentioned that you can directly serve Krishna. The direct servants of Krishna are very intimate. Nobody can acquire that position but a person. When we advance in our spiritual life when we purify heart is getting pure then it is a natural consequence of spiritual life that such a sadhak. A devotee develops natural attraction for one of the associates of Krishna so very nicely it will be mentioned. We will discuss at the end of this explanation. There are some friends of Krishna. There are the maid servants of associates of Srimati Radharani. There are parents of Krishna or Shantaras, the fruit of Krishna, the herb trees, plants of Vrindavan. So a devotee develops natural inclination to some of these devotees. So we all have a relationship with Krishna. We want to serve Krishna just like one man is there the same man. Some people relate him as father and some relate as husband. Some of them relate as son. In this way that same person is having various relationships. He's husband, he's boss and he is father. He is uncle. And all these relationships are enjoyable. Although the relationship between husband and wife is most intimate still son of the person would not like to become wife. Son wants to remain son. Enjoy that paternal affection. In a similar fashion. Although the relationship between the Gopis and Krishna is most intimate and gives the highest ecstasy still the devotees have an eternal relation with Krishna. And they want to serve Krishna in that unique relationship. Although complete freedom is there to serve in any relation. So that unique relation we have forgotten. And that relationship is gradually awakened. When we follow spiritual process very nicely we get attached to Krishna's name. We start getting pleasure. Then slowly a person starts getting attracted towards either of these devotees who enjoy a unique relationship with Krishna. We need not artificially follow this process. That is a natural development. And then a person hears more about such devotees. And then he takes their guidance and under their guidance keeps on serving Krishna eternally. And the same thing when a person is in conditioned state like us, we have spiritual master who is also very intimate servant of Krishna and same Bhavena. In the same way person should serve. So spiritual masters have got a unique mission and they serve Krishna in a unique way. So disciples should assist the spiritual master in carrying the same, it is being same bhava it is told here. So in the same mood what spiritual master is having disciples should serve Krishna. So either in the material world or in the spiritual world. It is told here savea sadhakurupayana Siddharupayana cha atrahi either in sadhakurupayana sadhanami's practice that we are doing here or siddharupayana on perfect platform tadbhavalipsunakarya in the same mood of a pure devotee under the guidance of a pure devotee person should live in Vrindavan and engage in service of Krishna. So the same Shlokas are mentioned in various scriptures. But I do not have taste. 1 may ask how will I do this thing? How will I find a person who is having such relationship with Krishna and then I will follow in his footsteps. So the gradual process is also mentioned and that is very very simple to follow. So what is that process? Srila bhaktis Dant Saraswati Thakur has commented as follows upon this verse one who has not yet developed interest in this Shloka is for those who have developed interest in Krishna consciousness. So 24 hours every moment a person should engage one's tongue and mind and live in Raja under the guidance of devotee. But if such interest is not there, Bhakti is Dhanmaraj has a solution. One who has not yet developed interest in Krishna consciousness should give up all material motives and train his mind. So giving up material motives is very important. Don't do Bhakti for pleasure of mind and body, any personal interest just for the interest of Krishna. You may get pleasure, you may not get pleasure does not matter just for Krishna's pleasure without material motive and train his mind by following the progressive regulative principles namely chanting and remembering Krishna and his name, form, quality, pastimes and so forth. Either name of Krishna, form of Krishna we see in the temple, we can glorify sing about that form or think of that form or the qualities of Krishna pastimes, of Krishna activities and so forth anything connected to Krishna. In this way, after developing a taste for such things, when we follow the rules and regulations strictly taste will develop. That is natural. So one should be very strict. Take the guidance of devotees just like we take guidance of doctor and be very strict in following. And one who is very strict, hunger automatically awakens, fever goes away by taking medicine. So after developing a taste for such things, one should try to live in Vrindavan and pass this time constantly remembering Krishna's name, fame, pastimes and qualities under the direction and protection of an expert devotee. This is the sum and substance of all instruction regarding the cultivation of devotional service. This is the sum and substance of all instructions. So thus, which are the rules and regulations for this, please hear the previous verses that we have discussed. Very soon we'll upload that in a playlist also on our channel by the name Nectar of Instruction. And you can go through it and you can read the book Nectar of Instruction also. And then you will understand all those rules and regulations. And when we follow all those things, then a taste is awakened. And then a person so Prabhupada told his disciples so follow all these instructions and preach very rigorously holiney. Work hard for spreading Krishna consciousness. And then when the taste is awakened in the old age you go and live in Vrindavan and chant and constantly think of Krishna. But unless you have worked very hard for Krishna while you are young you are energetic you will not be able to engage constantly in thinking of Krishna. Mind will agitate such pleasure will not be awakened and Vrindavan we can engage in sinful activities which is very detrimental. So this is the summon substance but of all the instructions and then now a very simple process. Very very simple process how to attain this platform. The mysticism of hearing process Bhaktistan Maharaj mentions. So what is the hope for us all these instructions also can be very difficult of Nectar of instruction. So many things to be avoided to be followed. But there is one very simple process. And what is that? These are the different stages of Krishna's Maranam which begins from hearing the holy name. In the neophyte stage one should always engage in hearing Krishna Katha. That is simple. So much Krishna katha is available now with the help of technology otherwise earlier spiritual master has spoken. Where will you hear again? But now Krishna katha is there on internet Prabhupada's Vani is there. All what Prabhupada has spoken entire day you can keep on playing just like people keep on hearing music. People are preparing for tough examination, an entrance examination and they do it by hearing music constantly. They have trained themselves. So mind needs intense engagement to solve the questions of physics, math and all such things. But they get addicted and the brain only works of some people when they hear the music. So some people don't hear it. They tell in exam it is not allowed. How will I write then? But otherwise they get trained by hearing music only their brain works and they are able to do it. So if it is possible we can keep on playing or we can keep on chanting and do our work also at the same time that is very much recommended. So otherwise as much as possible throughout the day hearing Krishna katha is easy in house you are doing any activity complete attention even though you are not able to give entire day keep on playing it in the background. The neophyte stage. In the neophyte stage one should always engage in hearing Krishna katha. This is called shamanadasha technical term is there shamanadasha stage of hearing. By constantly hearing the transcendental holy name of Krishna and hearing of his transcendental form qualities and pastimes either you can hear Srila Prabhupada's voice or that of his sincere disciples or you can chant and hear Krishna's name and his glories personally either of the ways. But keep on hearing. Just focus on the sound dust person cannot see the face clearly. Similarly because of Rajas and Thamas in the heart person cannot clearly understand Krishna consciousness that he or she may not accept easily all these facts. But by hearing the Krishna katha heart becomes cleansed and then all the knowledge becomes very clear. Just like in daylight there is no confusion. Where is ditch, where is path? You can avoid the ditch, traverse the path. So similarly all the confusion goes on. So then Varan Dasa comes means stage of acceptance. Simply by chanting everything of spiritual life will be understood. So please do not neglect this chant comes attached to the hearing of Krishna Katha. Then attachment initially attachment may not be there. Mind will tell why you are hearing so much force the mind keep on hearing. When one attains this stage of acceptance he becomes attached to the hearing of Krishnakatha. Then whenever there is time you want to hear Krishna katha that is called attachment. When one is able to chant in ecstasy then with this attachment when one chants he attains the stage of Smarana Vastha the stage of remembering. Now when we chant the name of Krishna ecstasy may not come. But if we follow this constant thing Varana Dasa comes and we develop some attachment then we continue. Then when we chant we get ecstasy. In chanting the name, form, pastimes of Krishna when one is able to chant in ecstasy he attains the stage of Smarana Vastha, the stage of remembering. So artificially if you try to think of Krishna by constantly looking at some picture of Krishna that may not be effective. One should work hard for Krishna under the guidance of pure devotee and chant and hear constantly. And in this way acceptance will come and then ecstasy will come in chanting. And when we are able to chant in ecstasy then automatically Holy Name will reveal the form of Krishna and we will be able to remember Krishna. By chanting he attains the stage of Smarana Vastha, the stage of remembering. So this remembering or Krishna Smarana has got recollection, absorption, meditation, constant remembrance and trance as five items if one is doing rightly Krishna's Marana so at first there is recollection. Recollection means we are not able to think. Obviously always sometimes we think of Krishna, other times we forget. At first remembrance of Krishna may be interrupted at intervals but later remembrance proceeds uninterrupted. When remembrance is uninterrupted it becomes concentrated and it is called meditation. So when one is able to constantly remember Krishna that is called meditation on Krishna. And when meditation expands and becomes constant it is called Anusmriti. Constant meditation, concentrated remembrance of Krishna, that is called anusriti. So these are technical stages. By uninterrupted and unceasing Anusmriti one enters the stage of Samadhi or spiritual trance. Person is completely absorbed in thought. Deep, condensed, concentrated thought of Krishna. One enters the stage of Samadhi or spiritual trance. After Smaran Dasa or Samadhi has fully developed the soul comes to understand his original constitutional position. At that time he can perfectly and clearly understand his eternal relationship with Krishna. That is called Sampati dasha, the perfection of life. So it begins with Shamana dasha. It ends in Sampati dasha or the perfection of life. So how can one remember Krishna always which is the crux of all the vedas? By hearing. So it is so simple. We have to just constantly hear throughout the day. Chant always, hear always and then we will develop attachment. Then when we chant there would be ecstasy. We'll be able to accept understand everything. And when we chant in ecstasy there is remembrance. Then we continue. Remembrance becomes concentrated. That is called meditation. Meditation becomes concentrated. Then Anusmriti samadhi. And when Samadhi this dasha is fully developed then a person understands who am I within this body? What is my original identity? What is my relationship with Krishna? At that time it is revealed by the spiritual master and that is called Sampakti dasha. Person has attained the perfection of life. So this status we are expected to attain by following this process. And it is so simple. What can be simpler than that? Just lend your ears to sound of Krishna katha constantly throughout the day. Chaitanya Charitamrita advises those who are near fights to give up all kinds of motivated desires. But giving up motivated desires is important just for the satisfaction of Krishna. Person should be very strict in following the rules and regulations and simply engage in regulative devotional service of the Lord. Regulative means according to the directions of scripture and devotees. In this way a neophyte can gradually develop attachment for Krishna's. Name, fame, form, qualities and so forth. When one has developed such an attachment he can spontaneously serve the lotus feet of Krishna even without following the regulative principle. So always you need not follow the rules and regulations. By following rules and regulations spontaneous attachment develops for Krishna. Then there is no need of rule and regulation. You can serve the Krishna the way it is being dictated from the heart at that stage. This stage is called Raghavakti or devotional service in spontaneous love. At that stage the devotee can follow in the footsteps of one of the eternal associates of Krishna. In Vrindavan. This is called Rag anuga raghanuga bhakti. Raghanuga Bhakti or spontaneous devotional service can be executed in the shantrasa. So there are five kinds of relationships that a devotee enjoys with Krishna. Either it can be done in Shantarasa when one experience to be like Krishna's cows or the stick or flute in the hands of Krishna. So flute in the hand of Krishna or the stick of Krishna. They are all persons but they serve as an apparently inert object for the pleasure of Krishna. But they are very conscious persons. They can talk, they can move, they feel they are completely conscious, not conditioned at all. But they have taken the form of objects to serve Krishna in that way that calls Shantarasa. There is no active service but when Krishna uses them in his service, they feel lot of pleasure. So a devotee might be having this relationship with Krishna or the flowers around Krishna's neck in the Dasirasa one follows in the footsteps of servants like Chitraka, Patraka or Raktaka they are servants of Krishna. Person may develop when he is following Raga Bhakti may develop attachment for Saj Bhakti just become servant of Krishna. Or in the friendly Satyarasa means mood of friendship one can become friend like Baldev, Sri, Dharma or Sudhama one can be Krishna's friend. In the Vasala Rasa characterized by paternal affection one can become like NAN, Maharaj and Yashoda and in the Madhurasa characterized by conjugal love one can become like Radharani or her lady friends such as Lalita and her serving maids manjaris like Rup and Rathi. This is the essence of all instruction in the matter of devotional service. So rest. What follows is glorification of the topmost place existing in this material universe. So that you can explore yourself in the concluding verses of Rup Goswami. If we discuss it, people may not be able to appreciate much of it. So last three verses you can explore on your own. But please understand this essence and try to implement in our life as soon as possible. Throughout the day we should engage ourselves in hearing Krishna Katha chanting and remembering as far as possible. So thank you so much for hearing about Krishna very nicely. Our life will become very happy simply by following. These are the instructions of God. Without any change it has come to us. So please try to read. Try to hear but under the guidance of devotees with strictness now we have brought Krishna Sankeirtan for you. So let us all try to do it. We cannot come to temple in COVID so in our own place does not matter. We can have same effect. Please hear attentively so it will last for a few minutes. Try to hear very attentively the way singer is singing and then you also can sing along with that. So please hear and sing and after that we will discuss questions. I'll be waiting for you. Hari Krishna hari Krishna krishna Krishna hari hari Krishna hari Rama hari Rama ram Ramah krishna Krishnandi Rama har Ram Ram Ram hari Krishna hari Krishna Krishna Krishna hari Nadi hari Rama hari Ram Ram ram Krishna hari Krishna Krishna Krishna hari hari hari Rama hari Ram Ram Ramahari hari Hari Ram Hari Ram Ram Ram hari hari hari Krishna hari Krishna Krishna Hari Hari Hari Ram Hari Ram Ram Ram hari hari Tai gori Haribo Haribo borinam sam kirtani agniki Samuel Hare Krishna so I hope it was nice the Sankirtan. So please do it at your home, with your friends, with your family every day and we make tremendous advancement. So I request all of you please start posting your questions in the chat box. Some questions have come already, others, please keep posting. This is by Virendrag Bote. Can chanting done on beads can also be done on counting on fingers? So amongst the 16 rounds, can some rounds be done by chanting on fingers and the remaining on beads? No, Prabhupada told 16 rounds on beads. Chanting is always good, but Prabhupada told chanting on beads is always better. So 16 rounds, please do on beads. Otherwise over and above that you use fingers without fingers. You can continue. Is online association or devotees equivalent to temple association or physical association with devotees? Both have got their own importance. Just like hearing association, reading is association, serving is association of pure devotee and all kinds of associations should be taken. So there are advantages, pros and cons of both. So both should be taken physical as well as online. Prabhuji, I am twelve year old. My parents say I am. This is by Yugoyal. My parents say I am too small to keep Akadashiv Ratas. So that depends upon you. I think twelve years old, you can easily keep it. So you can request your parents that. Kindly allow me, it is important and if I feel uncomfortable, I definitely let you know. So you can request them. Next is by Anub Gupta Hari Krishna Prabhuji. We do the tilakas with Gopi chandan because the Lord and his pure devotees have walked on that Raj and it is the dust of their feet. Is it a correct understanding? Please. So I have not heard from Srila Prabhupada about this. But devotees as they explain Gopis left their body on that spot. So that is why that place is very very pure. So we use it. From that Gopi chandantalab, the clay comes and we use it. Next is by Bibhas Roy. Prabhu, kindly explain what should be the daily routine to follow Krishna consciousness from Mangalarti to Shayanarti for a working personnel who chants 16 rounds. So the basic principle is sandwich program. What is that? Morning you follow, you get up early. Small mangalarti. You can do chant sansar Dhavanal Guruvashtaka eight stanzas. And you can offer at least flowers to Krishna or incense to Krishna. You can offer as much as possible, but at least flower, incense, lamb, something can be offered or all three as per your convenience. Start with something and by doing this little deity worship then you can start chanting your rounds after that or some devotees, they get up very early. They chant first and then they do Aarti. It is all right but try to stick to a time and then you can offer bhoga to Krishna and then you can start your work. And once you come back in the evening, you can again do some kirtan and reading of the books or hearing of lectures and then you can go to bed in this way. In daytime we work in our regular duties. Morning and evening we engage in Sadhana. All the activities are for Krishna. Daytime also we are working so that we can use the result of our activities for Krishna. And morning and evening it is directly the Sadhana Bhakti, Shravanam Kirtanam and deity worship. And you can invite your neighbors and do with them. Then it is much more powerful in devotee association. So I have some very nice meditation. Please call them. If they come in the morning it is very nice. Otherwise in the evening you call some of them and you share some prasadam with them. In this way very quick advancement will happen. So if we simply stick to this process morning program, evening program, sandwich program and do preaching also then contamination of material life will not touch even householders. So these things are important. Sandwich program along with preaching keep inviting other people and try to preach. As far as so and preaching is simple, we open Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita or we hear Prabhupada's lecture and then as per our capacity we can try to explain to any new person. Or if they have more doubts you can connect them to devotees in this way. In group you can keep on following this. And for more details you can please mail us and some devotee will personally guide you. Next is by Virendra Bhote. How is our daily Vedi Bhakti be gradually transformed into Raghanuga Bhakti? I think I just explained in this lecture the same thing. We have to follow niranjan Kumar. Hare Krishna prabhuji. I think this is not possible to live permanently in Vrindavan Dham for many people. Then what he can do? So Vrindavan Dham does not mean you are right that that Rajdham Vrindavan only wherever devotees are there and they are engaged in service of Krishna. Following all the rules and regulations of a pure devotee that places Vrindavan. So otherwise we also should not live in various cities. We are living in Mumbai metropolitan city. Very polluted full of so much noise and traffic and other things. But no, here we are serving Krishna very nicely under the guidance of pure devotee. So same we are living in Vrindavandham. So wherever Krishna is worshipped. So Krishna tells namtishthami. Vaikunte yogi namrida. Yeshua. What is Vrij? What is Vrindavan? Where Krishna is always living. So where does Krishna live? He explains to his devotee Narad nam tishtami vaikunte. I don't live in Vakunta. So you live in the heart of devotees yogi Namrida yeshua, not in the heart of devotees of Yogis also. Then where do I live? Yat Gayanti madh bhakta tatar tashtami narada I live where my devotees sing my names, sing my Glories. So wherever sankirtan process, chanting, hearing is happening on a regular basis. That place is called Vrindavan. So every house can be made Vrindavan. Have a deity of. Krishna in your house and regularly worship Krishna by chanting and hearing. In this way we live in Vrindavan. But living with devotees and in Vrindavan is very important. But Vrindavan is not localized to someplace. Vrindavan is manifest anywhere, wherever you worship Krishna sincerely. Next is by Bharat Shivlani. Hare Krishna. Prabhuji, can I chant my japa without taking bath in early morning time? Yes, you can chant. There are no rules and regulations. But if you take bath and chant, then chanting would be much more effective. Next is by Siddharth Satpati Rabbhuji. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. How to forget someone I love so much? And that person doesn't even care. That person has rejected me. But I am not able to forget that person. Hare Krishna. Do not worry. Siddharth Ji It is very simple process. And so one devotee expressed also that I was so much attached to another person. And again this rejection happened. And this devotee was thinking, how will I be ever able to forget? But he was trying to serve Krishna and surrendered completely to Krishna. Followed all the rules and regulations without exception, very sincerely. And sometimes the past thoughts were coming, but he was resisting. I should think of Krishna, I should not have any material thoughts. And then he told Prabhu, one day suddenly I'm not having any attachment of that person. I'm not feeling like thinking of that person at all. And he was surprised by this overnight magic. And he was telling Prabhu, I was crying buckets for the person. But then now I am completely unattached. So it is magic. So thoughts are coming and mind is forcing me to think of the person. And I try to resist. I was trying to follow sincerely. And one day this blessing happened. So all the attachments are created by Krishna's energies. Detachment can be put into effect again by Krishna's energy. So simply please surrender completely unto Krishna. The more intensely, sincerely you follow Krishna will remove all these knots from the heart. Everything will be forgotten. And moreover, we can understand theoretically also we are not actually attached. That person does not exist. We are attached to dress of the person. The voice, the behavior, the appearance. These are all externals mind and body behavior, voice and the form. These are all external dresses. We have never seen that person actually. So what is the point in getting attached to a dress? So unfortunately, this world is trained like that. Attach yourself to people and you'll become happy. This is the wrong training. It does not happen in that way. We have to attach ourselves to Krishna. And that is the right process of one satisfaction. So please follow Krishna consciousness. Rest assured, if you completely surrender unto Krishna, everything will be taken care. So, thank you so much for all your nice questions. So please try to hear as much as possible throughout the day. We'll meet again very soon. And please don't forget to come for Srila Prabhupada series every evening eight to 09:00 p.m.. We are discussing the pastimes. We are covering entire biography of PRA.