Hare Krishna. A very warm welcome to all of you. So, in the past few lectures we discussed the very important shlokas explained by Srila Rupa Goswami Prabhupada. So let us continue today. So today's discussion reviving one's spiritual health will be based on text number seven of Ughamrita nectar of Instruction. As we have discussed before, Nectar of Instruction comprises of eleven very important verses which are meant to give a beginner in Krishna consciousness practical direction. In following the spiritual path, we read theory, but how to apply practically in our life. So that is why for any sincere person who wants not just to keep spiritual concepts in the book, but wants to implement in one's life practically, he or she should go through this very important book Nectar of Instruction. So the foremost instruction if we have to execute spiritual life, Srila Rup Goswami explains, is VA Cho Vegam manasakro devagam Jivva Vegam udaropas Thavegam etan Vega anyo vishahitadhirah first thing is we have various Vegas urges in the body. So one has to control these urges. So we have to be very careful in our life. So many urges, desires we have and we get carried away by those urges. So I should practice tolerating those urges, not getting carried away by that. How to practice for this? Further instructions are given by Srila Rup Goswami in the subsequent verses. But we have to understand, all these things are there to make us free from these six urges of the body. Then Srila Rup Goswami explains six activities which destroy one's spiritual advancement. After that, sri La Rup Goswami explains six principles of spiritual advancement. All these topics we have covered previously in the previous Sunday sessions. So you can go back and search six Principles of Spiritual Advancement six Things which destroy Bhakti six Principles of Satsanga Association and maybe we can create a playlist also. And then you can search for it. In a couple of days we'll be doing it. So then Srila Rup Goswami explains after explaining six Principles of Advancement on Spiritual path, the most important factor and that is association of the devotees. Satsang, the current state of our life is because of the association we have had. Some person is there who is sitting in jail now. Why? Because of wrong association. Somehow he associated with people having similar mindset. Let me somehow cheat, grab, beg, borrow, steal, whatever, enjoy life. And because of this association, he develops certain desire and the reaction of those desire is he's sitting in jail. Another person, he met with some people who took him to drugs intoxicants and now his life is messed up. Another person who got association of wise people, self controlled people, he's peaceful in his life. Some very fortunate soul gets association of devotees and attains the perfection of spiritual life. So our entire life, happiness, distress, it all depends on one's association. That's it. So that is why satsang association of devotees is very important factor throughout the life. We have to maintain this. Now what is satsang? Should I simply go and sit with devotees? See them, hear them? Yes all these things are important. But there are six principles of satsang also that also we have discussed. And then Rup goswami further explains. You have to have association apply these six principles of satsang. But you have to apply it with the right person. The most advanced spiritualist, the most advanced devotee. So devotees are of three types. Ganesh chadikari madhya madhikari and uttamadhikari. A neophyte who is chanting the names of Krishna but then is on material platform and he's having other material desires also. Then intermediate platform madhya Madhikari and after Madhya Madhikari comes very extraordinary platform which is rarely attained by the spiritualists and that is called uttamadhikari most advanced devotee Mahabhagavat pure devotee of Krishna. And we should try to take shelter of such a pure devotee and uttamadhikari and accept him as spiritual master and apply these principles of satsang. So this also we have covered in the lectures and in the last session which I took. Of course Samitasan Prabhu has taken in between. So it was the greatest danger risk of spiritual life that Rubosami further explains. So a person is very very fortunate to find a very advanced devotee. But he becomes unfortunate immediately if he perceives the pure devotee to be an ordinary man. Guru Shu Narmatir. So that is why Ru Goswami has warned that please understand. We are all having material senses now. So we cannot understand spiritual subject matters and have spiritual vision. Drishta. Sabha janitai vapucha dosha. Vapu means body. The body will have many doshas or defects even body of a very advanced devotee. But all these defects are not material. They are actually spiritual in nature. And the body of pure devotee is also completely spiritual. But Drishta. Swabhava Janita we all have our own natures conditioned by Rajaguna Tamaguna and Satvaguna and drishti our vision is conducted contaminated influenced by these three modes which we are having. Drishtai. Sabha Janita Vapusha Chadoshai Naprakritam Yabhakta Janasipashet so please do not consider the defects on the body of a pure devotee to be material defects. So it is being explained further by Ru Goswami. Gangam Bhasam Nakalu Buddh Buddha Feyena Pankai just like Ganga is there on the river Ganges you will find sometimes foam, bubble and mud and the water appears to be muddy contaminated. But it is being told in the last line brahma dravatvam. It is completely spiritual water. So although it is appearing contaminated still a person who is wise he will take bath in Ganges despite so called contaminated external appearance of the Ganges. Because the spiritual purity is intact of the Ganges. So it is being explained. We should not think all of us are suffering. We are having bodily defects because of our past karma, sinful activities and spiritual master is required who can make us free from these past violations of laws. Of nature which we have done for which we are suffering. The suffering in our life people think is because of a lack of education. Because I'm not living in a proper country or proper place state. Because of some people around me because of the weather or some climatic conditions. No, it is not because of that. These people do not know this is ignorance of society and they try to fix these externals fix people around you fix some external conditions, education, beauty, opulence, et cetera and you'll be happy. No, we suffer only because of the laws of nature we have violated in the past. So the spiritual master, if we follow his instructions nicely who tells us to surrender to Krishna he gets us relieved from all the past reactions of sinful life. But a person may see oh, spiritual master is also getting old. Spiritual master is getting diseased. He himself is getting diseases means he is also having bad karma in his baggage. So he himself is not liberated. How can he liberate us? This is very wrong mentality rup Goswami wants and the scriptures also want. All the instructions of Srila Rup Goswami are thoroughly based on the scriptural evidences. So this is evidence in Srimad Bhagavatam also when Yudhishthir Maharaj was very much disturbed after the great war of Kurukshetra where crores of people died and he thought because of my desire just to reinstate me on the position of king so much loss of life has happened and bereavement and lamentation is there in society now. So he was not able to find Solace very much disturbed. So then he was given this instruction that please understand bhishma pitahama lying on the bed of arrows he instructs Yodhishthir Maharaj, please do not think that this suffering is happening to you because of your past sinful activities. The example given is just like mother in law cannot directly correct or Chastise daughter in law who has been recently married. She is very new to house so she may commit many mistakes. But who will get the scolding? Not daughter in law, but the daughter daughter for no mistake, no fault of her will get scolding by the mother. Because by scolding daughter actually mother in law wants to correct daughter in law. So in a similar fashion Krishna wants to correct us, guide us. But we are not willing to listen to Krishna. So that is why Krishna engages his pure devotees. Sometimes he Chastises, sometimes there appears some physical punishment given to the pure devotees and through that Krishna is willing to instruct us. One very beautiful instance comes in Sri Chathana Charitamrita. We are discussing the verses given by Sripa Goswami. Brother of Srila Rupa Goswami is Srila Sanatan Goswami. So Sanatana Goswami and Rup Goswami were given the task of re excavating the lost places of Krishna's pastimes in Vrindavan. And Sanatan Goswami wanted to meet Chaitanya Mahaprabhu who was residing in Jagannathpuri. After taking Sannyas So, Sanatan Goswami travelled through the forest of Jarikhanda to meet Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And when he was crossing that forest, of course you don't have restaurants in forest and even restaurants were not there at that time. So people would stay in the temple, take vasadam from the temple. In forest, food may not be regularly available. So Sanatan Goswami, when he was traveling, his diet was very irregular and he happened to take bath in a reservoir of water which was not very pure. So if you want to keep ourselves fit, regulation lifestyle is important. Prabhupada tells if we eat in a regulated fashion and have a regulated life and we take bath two, three times in a day, then we'll be fit and healthy. So simply not by taking medicine or doing XYZ, you can become fit. Unless the lifestyle is regulated, fitness will never come. So Sanatan Goswami, somehow, because of not having proper food and taking bath in contaminated water, he developed lot, many sores upon his body which were oozing, blood and pus. And in this condition, Chaitanymaprabhu, even though Sanatan Goswami was having a diseased body, chaitanya Mahaprabhu, out of great affection, whenever he would see Sanatan Goswami, he would go and embrace Sanatana Goswami and all the pus and blood would smear the body of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So Sanatana Goswami became very much disturbed that I came here for my purification. But what am I doing? I'm going to hell. I am contaminating the body of Lord Chaitanya who is Krishna himself. And what great sin I'm incurring for this. So he thought I came here for my purification, my betterment. But the result is otherwise. So he thought if I continue to live here, chaitanya Mahaprabhu will keep on embracing me. And he was feeling very very embarrassed that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's body is getting smeared with blood and pus of his body. So he decided so let me leave my body, commit suicide. So I have come here to see Lord Jagannath. Because he was belonging to not actually belonging, they took birth in Brahmin family. But because of the association of the Muslim rulers they were ministers in the government of Nawab. So because of association with the Muslim rulers they were ostracized from the Brahmanical society and they were considered Muslims only. So that time society was very very rigid. Even if somebody who is following some other religion like Islam, he sprinkles water, they will tell you also have got converted, you have become contaminated. So that is why the entire culture is lost because of these extremist beliefs. So they were also ostracized from society and they were considered Muslims. And in Jagannath Puri temple only Hindus are allowed entry. Even some of the Hare Krishna devotees who come from other country, they are not given entry. So their only hope of seeing Jagannath is when Lord Jagannath comes out during the Rathyatra festival in the month of June, July, it happens every year. So Sanatan Goswami, that was his only hope that when Lord Jagannath comes out I'll be able to see Jagannath. So then he was waiting when I would see Jagannath on the rathyatra cart. And the carts are very huge having huge big wheels. I will leave my body falling in front of the wheel of the ratha. And in this way when he was contemplating then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he's Krishna himself, he knows the mind of everybody. He came to Sanatana Goswami and then he chastised him that you are thinking of leaving this body. So what kind of understanding you have? You think this body belongs to you and you think by committing suicide you will attain spiritual perfection. So when we discuss the shloka from Bhagavad Gita that perfection of life can be attained by Yamvyamvapi Smaran Bhavam Tiyajate Ante Kalevaram Antakala Chamamuktva Kalevaram krishna is assuring in Bhagavad Gita at the time of death. A person who thinks of me, he comes to me, comes to my planet and he gets a body of my nature. Krishna's body does not get changed by the influence of time. It does not get old, it does not die. It is eternal, full of knowledge and full of pleasure. So any living entity also gets a spiritual body if he is able to think of Krishna at the time of death. So some people ask questions. So prabhu. If I commit suicide now and thinking of Krishna then I will go to Krishna, back to Godhead. So that is why Chaitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to instruct us. So that is why he did this leela Sanatan Goswami getting diseased and thus we are getting instructions. So many people can think oh let me commit suicide anyway this life is full of embarrassment. Thinking of Krishna, I'll be perfect. No struggle is required. Purification is required. So Mahaprabhu told nobody can attain shelter of Krishna's lotus feet. Simply by leaving this body voluntarily. One has to please Krishna by executing devotional service. That is the only way. Otherwise it is so easy. Just see Krishna's form and shoot yourself. Will you go back to Krishna? No. It is a sinful activity. Chaitanya mahaprabhu told Then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu explained to Sanatana Goswami another very important factor that you have surrendered to me. And you think this body belongs to you so that you can leave it. This body is my property. How can you destroy somebody else's property? So that is why one can never think of committing suicide. Because this body does not belong to us. For a devotee or a nondivote, we have not created this body. We have been given this body. This body the resource. If we use this resource very nicely. Suppose a person is given a gun. It's a very powerful resource. Now that gun, if it is used in the service of the government a person can get lot of money, lot of name, fame, promotions, property, everything. He can become general. And if that same gun is used for one's own personal satisfaction whimsical desires then the person may be given capital punishment also. Or he suffers a long time in jail. Similarly, this body has been given to us as a resource. If we use in the service of the person God who has given us this body then we can attain unlimited happiness. And if we use Whimsically just to satisfy myself, this person is giving me trouble. Let me use this gun to kill him. Then we are gone. We are finished. Gun will also be taken away and we will be put in jail. So we will not get another human body. And so much punishment will be given to us. So human life is not meant for independent sense enjoyment but to give pleasure to Krishna. In this way, all the senses of a living entity are actually satisfied. The science people do not know. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Sanatan Goswami, this body is not your property. Moreover, when you have surrendered completely unto me then Mahaprabhu explained I am here in Jagannath Puri but Vrindavan where Lord Krishna appears through that place. I want to spread the glories of Lord Krishna everywhere. And I want to do all these tasks from your body, your specific body. So another very important instruction Lord Chaitanya gave that never consider that you are the doer. You are doing anything either in material world or in spiritual world. In material world, material energy. Maya durga Devi has got certain plans. So she needs to create, maintain and destroy. Srishti sithi pralaya sadhana Shaktireka. So as per the desires of the living entity just like the government wants to kill so they have the executor in the jails also he will hang the criminals. So those people who have this mentality of killing, they can do that job. Then there are some people who want to save the lives. They are recruited as soldiers. Some people want to give life doctors. So like this as per the inclination of the living entity the plans of the government are executed. But plan is always executed of the government. And those living entities who are surrendered to Krishna they are not under control of material energy. But Krishna has got certain plan for this material world. And what is a plan? To make all the living entities happy by making them realize of their real position and re establishing the loving attraction with God. So Krishna was using Sanatan Goswami. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to use Sanatana Goswami to execute these activities in Vrindavan through his body. So thus we should never become proud. Oh, I'm doing book distribution. I am preaching. I'm bringing some people to Krishna consciousness. No, we are very fortunate that Krishna has used us as an instrument. And then Sanatana Goswami, when he was still not agreeing then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave further instructions. And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu explained sanyas Dharma. Through these instructions, Mahaprabhu told so Sannyasi is not supposed to behave on the platform of duality. We all behave on the platform of duality. What does it mean? Few things are attractive for this mind and body. We work hard to chase those things. And few things they are not pleasant for the mind and senses. And we wish to run away from those things. An entire life is wasted just behind these two activities. Sukhai dukhamokshai. Just to please the senses and body attain those things which are pleasant to the senses, to mind and just to keep away with that situation from that person or those objects which are creating trouble for my mind and body. So this is called duality. But this duality is illusion. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told sanyasi is not supposed to succumb to this illusion. So it is told in Chaitanya Charitamrita. Bhadra means which is good. Abhadra means which is not good. It is only manodharma. It is only mental concoction the same stool. It is very very pleasant to pig. And it is very abominable. Nasty for us, tasty for pig. Nasty for us. Similarly what is tasty for us will be nasty for pig. You take a pig out and put him in clear waters he will again go and rush into the dirty waters of the drain. So thus what is dirty? What is good? This is all illusion, manodharma. Actually everything is bad in this material world. Because both the things are keeping us away from Krishna. Either we are working hard to avoid unpleasant situation or we are working hard to get some pleasant situation. In both the cases we forget to serve Krishna. And thus we continue the suffering of birth, death, old age, disease and so many calamities in this life. So thus both things are bad in this material world. Both are religion. So a sanyasi is not supposed to take something as pleasant and something as unpleasant. He is always supposed to remain on the platform of neutrality. Thus if I reject certain body that is diseased then I am violating my sannyas dharma. So those who are in the renounced order of life who have dedicated they are not supposed to get carried away by what is good and what is bad. Like sometimes the devotees ask when they visit some of our temples. So Prabhu, you are telling Rup Goswami was living under a tree. But here the devotees are using ACS, blowers and cars and all these things. So where is your detachment? So yeah, sometimes a person can get such thoughts. But then the person is not proper. In his analysis, there are many, many devotees whom he has not seen who has sacrificed their life and for preaching Krishna consciousness. Right from the time of Haridas Thakur who was beaten very badly. Right from the time of Jatayu who lost his life right from the time of the monkey soldiers who lost their life fighting for Lord Ram Chandra. And always devotees are met with persecution. And even now also today also devotees. So the devotee does not fall for what is present for me, what is unpleasant for me. Devotee just takes what is good for the service of Krishna and avoids something which is not good for service of Krishna. So ideally devotee can remain in jungle. That is very good. Prabhupada tells now in Mayapur one of the biggest temples of the world is coming. But when Prabhupada started the project he was living in a hut. And the disciples were sorry that they are not able to offer anything good comfortable to their spiritual master. So Prabhupada told, no, this is very good. This is the life of devotee. This grass hut is most suitable for spiritual life. And I am completely happy here. But if we continue to stay in this grass hut who will come to meet us? Who will come to see us? That is why we need to have a splendid gorgeous place for Krishna. And in this way when people are attracted to come to this place we can instruct them in Krishna consciousness. So the same devotee, he can use all the resources he can use. Just like Prabhupada. Prabhupada was using airplanes. Prabhupada circled the globe many many times. And Prabhupada would live in very nice palatial temples also. Prabhupada was traveling in Rolls Royce, also in Australia. When Prabhupada went So the newspaper headlines carried Swami comes Rollsing in. Because he came in Rolls Royce devotees had arranged that for Prabhupada. But we don't see other side of Prabhupada. How Prabhupada when he was living in Vrindavan? Now if you go to Radha Damoda temple of course the rooms are improved now. So they were dilapidated. And there Prabhupada was living in very humble circumstances. It was very hot in Vrindavan summers when disciples were not able to manage the American disciples. Prabhupada told them we all survived in those circumstances. So what you do is you switch off the bulb, all the lights of the room, close all the windows and in this way you try to survive the afternoon. It's very hot. There were no AC, nothing for Prabhupada. And at that time Prabhupada single handedly he was an old man without any money. Prabhupada would write. Prabhupada not knowing proper typing. Also using single finger, index finger he would type we see so huge as Srimad Bhagavatam. Prabhupada simply using index finger he would type Bhagavatam. But he was determined I have to fulfill the mission of my spiritual master. Alone. Prabhupada would travel to Delhi, get the books or back to Worded magazine printed published. And he was the editor of the magazine. He was the typist, he was the publisher and he was the distributor. Then in cycle Prabhupada would go house to house in Vrindavan and would collect some coins so that he can sustain this publication of magazine. And Prabhupada personally would deliver this back to Goddess newsletter also. So this side of Prabhupada we are not seeing. We are seeing that oh Prabhupada, some pictures are there. Prabhupada is eating very nice thing which is offered to Krishna. But we don't see how Prabhupada fasted for months. And when it was dwadashi next day devotees were supposed to break fast. And that day also Prabhupada rejected no, I don't want it. And devotees were surprised. Prabhupada, we just fasted for one day and we are so much disturbed. How can you do it? You have not eaten anything for many days. So Prabhupada told I am the practical evidence that we are not the body. I am the living proof of this fact. So thus devotees accept everything. Devotees. Prabhupada accepted Luxuries also. Because plane is not a luxury. It is required to travel and reception if disciple is offering you. And disciple is supposed to keep spiritual master very comfortable. Being representative of Krishna. Why should spiritual master reject? Prabhupada told. But then Prabhupada has taken so many hardships, so much struggle also. And like this the disciples who were living in good places they struggled so much for Prabhupada. Then they lost their lives also. They went through so much of torture also they were taken as CIA agents. In India. They were arrested. In Russia, they were arrested in Africa they were killed. In Bangladesh. They were killed. Even now there is torture and some people they drop bombs in the temples and so many other things they happen. So thus it is not that devotee is also getting attached to certain things. No, we have to preach to poor people. We have to preach rich people also. A rich man is accustomed to air conditions and all these things. If you sit under a tree then which rich man will come to hear? He will be very very uncomfortable. So thus we have certain arrangement where all sections, segments of society can be preached. Krishna consciousness. So in this way a sanyasi or a devotee is not supposed to fall for what is apparently good for the senses, what should be avoided. But he takes only what is good for senses of Krishna. He takes that as pleasure, as pleasurable, as pleasant. And he avoids that which is not required for advancement in Krishna consciousness. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave this Sannyas Dharma the attitude of Sanyasi also by this pastime of having disease body of Sanatana Goswami he told Sanathi should not discriminate. And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu revealed very extraordinary devotional sentiments. The love that God feels for his devotees. So then one devotee Jagadanand Pandit. He suggests sanatana goswami. Sanatan Goswami. It's better Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has given you a place in Vrindavan. So better you travel to Vrindavan. Otherwise this embarrassment will keep on happening. When Mahaprabhu got to know that Sanatana Goswami has been suggested to go back to Vrindavan so he immediately became angry that that Jaga, that young boy he is daring enough to give suggestions to you who are much more advanced in spiritual life than him. And Sanatan Goswami, when he heard this he became you know when others are scolded. You become happy when you are praised. Oh I am better in spiritual life. But the devotee is having other mode. So Sanatana Goswami he became sad and he told I am so unfortunate. Today I have realized the fortune of Jagadhan and Pandit. You are scolding Jagadhan and Pandit. It means he is very intimate to you. Whom does a person scold who is very intimate? And me? You are offering respects. Whom does a person offer respects? Respect is respect. And everything happens in a formal relationship. Lord Vishnu is offered great respects by the Vakuntuvasis. But the Gopas of Vrindavan they will ride on the shoulders of Krishna. No respect Krishna I will ride upon you. So in an intimate relationship there is no respect. So sanatana goswami. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was always praising, very respectful. And Jagdhanand Pandit was scolded here. So Sanatana Goswami became sad. So today I realized that he is actually very intimate to you and me. You have kept away from this relationship by always praising me. Then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu corrects him. He gets embarrassed. Oh actually what has this happened? And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu reveals his mind. Actually now here what is my mind? Actually why do I embrace you? So I always feel that I am your maintainer. And very nice example is given by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Just like the mother when the child passes stool in urine mother takes the stool of the child as sandalwood paste. And mother is not at all disturbed. Mother does not keep the child away because of such obnoxious so called obnoxious activities. In a similar fashion I take you as my children and I think I am your maintainer. In this mood I embrace you. So I am not at all disturbed by this pus and blood oozing out of your body. Rather I feel the fragrance of sandalwood when I embrace you. So this is the mood of God. So this mood of God also chaitanyma Aprabhu revealed by this pastime that if you have such disease that your entire body is infested with pus our family members also will not come close. But God will come close. And not just close, he will embrace us. So this is life. This is what we are hankering for. So all these wonderful instructions became possible only when Sanatanam Goswami developed these disease source on his body. And then finally after when the pastime is over then again Chaitanya Mahaprabhu after giving these instructions he embraced Sanatana Goswami and all the source on his body immediately disappeared. And then Haridas Thakur told Mahaprabhu so this was your pastime, your leela. You made Sanatan Goswami cross that forest. You made him take bath and because of you these swords came on his body and it was your amazing leela, amazing pastimes. So because we will never take spiritual instructions through all these things the instructions are given to us. So the understanding is the body of spiritual master of a. Pure devotee should never to be taken as an ordinary body which is suffering because of spiritual masters or pure devotees'past sinful activities. No, they are completely liberated. Suru Goswami wants we have to be careful from this mundane vision. And then he explains in the purport you all can read how one can identify an advanced devotee and similar thing Chaitanya Mahaprabhu tells just like pure devotee is inconceivable cannot be understood by mundane mind and senses. Similarly, in verse number seven chathanamah prabhu. Sorry. Srila Rup goswami explains sri Krishna nam saat Krishna nam charitadi Sitapi avidya. Sita means sweet. SIAT means it is there. That is the nature of Krishna's name. Krishna's pastimes, Krishna's form that all these are very very sweet. The chanting of Hare Krishna mantra meditating upon his form, meditating upon his pastimes, his instructions these are very very nectarian activities. These are transcendentally sweet. But rukh goswami says Siath Krishna nam charitadi Sitapi avidya pitopta Tapta rasanasi narochikanu. Pita means bile. When there is more secretion of bile in the body then the person gets jaundiced. Surup Goswami is explaining just like sugar candy, if a healthy person eats, it tastes very nice. It is sweet. But the same sugar candy it tastes bitter to a person who is suffering from jaundice. Similarly Pitopt Rasanasi Narochi Kanu those people living entities in this world who are suffering from the jaundice of avidya nessians they are in the bodily concept of life. This activities, this name of Krishna activity of Krishna pastime of Krishna which is very very nectarian, it will appear bitter. So Rupa Goswami then suggests a simple remedy. So first of all Rupa Goswami makes us aware of the disease. So your disease is this bodily concept of life. So never try to use this body, mind, senses to understand truth. So just like you can mistake a pure devotee as an ordinary human being. Similarly we will mistake the name, form activities of Krishna as mundane affairs or as rather bitter activities. But it is not bitter at all. So Rukh Goswami mentions what is the solution then of this remedy? So the solution is sugar candy only. So if a person keeps on taking sugar candy, the jaundice patient although it is bitter in the beginning, that same sugar candy, it cures the disease. And then it becomes very very sweet to taste Swad Vikramadi. So then it is being explained, it becomes very very nectarian. How a simple remedy is being suggested by Ruth Goswami and that is Adharad Anudinam Kalusai vajushta jushta means to taste or to accept adharad Anudinam. So if a person regularly Anudinam means throughout the day or day after day consistently. So throughout the day if a person chants Hari Krishna Mahamantra 24 hours Prabhupada writes in bracket constantly 24 hours or day after day. If he cannot do that, generally people cannot do that. So certain minimum rounds are recommended. You chant these many rounds day after day. But it is very important that a person should be regular in this adharat Anudinam. So Anudinam regularity is important. And adharat adharat means with great attention. With great care and attention. If a person chants so many times we are chanting and the devotees ask are you getting pleasure in Krishna consciousness? This chanting is really nice. And they are asking such question even after a long time. Maybe after a decade or two decades of Krishna consciousness. So if this aadharath is not there, if this great care and attention is not there then the taste will not come. So it is being explained in this very important verse that we are all suffering from this disease. So we were talking together, me and Dheergopal Prabhu. So Prabhu explained we are discussing the amazing wonders of ayurveda so. Prabhu's grandfather was very expert in treating the person who is suffering from a snake bite. So he would chant some mantras and some herbs or root would be administered to that person and something happens and then the poison is taken out from the body. So this root ordinarily it is very very bitter. And if anybody tastes it he cannot just keep it in his mouth, he would puke. But then the person who is having a snake bite this root or herb it tastes very very sweet. So in a similar fashion sense enjoyment. It appears very very sweet to us. But Bhaktivino Thakur is singing vishaya hala Hale diva nishihiya Jwalay So actually we are suffering from this material disease of this bodily concept of life. Chattana mahaprabhu says jeevajago Jeevo gaura chandra bole. So please the living entities please arise. Please awake. Now we are having a spiritual disease. We are unconscious on the spiritual platform. Just like at night we become unconscious on the gross platform. So we cannot enjoy anything of this gross world. We'll be dreaming or unconscious at night in a similar fashion. Now we are spiritually unconscious. So we cannot understand, we cannot see, we cannot hear, we cannot relish anything which is belonging to the spiritual platform. So spiritual activities rather they seem to be bitter. If a person is very much engrossed in this bodily concept of life thinking I am this body if he is very much entangled in the material enjoyment. So if this person thinks oh no, please don't take this snake poison out of my body otherwise I'll not be able to enjoy the sweet root. That is foolishness. You are suffering because of snake poison. That is why this root is it is tasting sweet to you. So this sense enjoyment it tastes sweet to people who suffer whose hearts are burning day and night from so many complications of this material life. Prabhupada very nicely explains in the purport of this shloka that this material world is called Durashaya. Durashaya means false shelter. If a rabbit takes shelter of a lion lion, lion, can you please save me? Animals will kill me outside. Lion will tell yes please come, I will save you. So this is called durashaya. A false shelter rabbit would be killed in a similar fashion. Those people who do not take shelter of Krishna but take shelter of material energy this is durashaya. Then there are so many complications in life. The hearts are burning always there is one problem. They solve this problem only to notice that so many other problems have come in my life there is some problem I study. I think education will solve the problem and then I get a job. So even though I've got a job then there is another health problem. You solve health problem then there is husband problem, wife problem, you solve that there is children problem and then like these problems keep on appearing in our life. Life after life and millennium after millennium. Divanishi Hiya Jwale so just to enjoy this little pleasure something nice I eat for a few moments in a day. Something I watch for some time in a day. Some pleasure of the reproductive organs. This little thing is little enjoyment is there. Even though a person is bitten by snake he also has certain kind of enjoyment. That root is very very tasty, very sweet to a person. But it is foolish to think that oh this is very nice kind of enjoyment. No. So similarly we have to understand the vedas are telling any person who is spiritually fit cannot enjoy this material pleasure. It is actually suffering. It is another form of suffering. But we take it as great pleasure because of our being contaminated by this disease. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu says that I have brought this Hare krishna Mahamantra Laotumi Magi. So you are now suffering sleeping on the spiritual platform. So I have got this very nice medicine for you. So please take this medicine. G Vajago g Vajago Gaura Chandraboli please wake up. Please realize this human form of life you can use to awaken yourself to solve this spiritual disease and regain your spiritual health. There is no other purpose of human existence. This pleasure never satisfies the heart. So the senses are compared to snakes. As if you know MahaPrasadam mantra. This mantra we are supposed to chant before we take prasadam of Krishna Mahaprasade Govindhanam Brahmani Vaishnavi. In this mantra the snakes are compared to the ocean of Nessians, Sharir, Avidya, Jal, Jared, Indria, Tahekal and these senses they are the cause of our death. So these senses are like snakes. And when the snake bites the senses bites us. The eyes are biting. Oh please show me this video. And we get disturbed by this demand of the eyes. Similarly the ears are biting. You please feed some nice music into it. And the belly is biting, the genitals are biting, all the senses are biting. And in this snake bitten state when a person is bitten by the desire of senses material enjoyment appears very sweet. However a transcendentalist, a spiritualist understands this is a state of great suffering. So Rugh goswami. Cells need not worry. A very simple process is being recommended. The same thing which is appearing bitter to us. Just like a patient does not tell doctor no, no this is bitter, I will not take this medicine. No. So the patient understands if only I take this bitter medicine I will be able to solve all the problems of life. So all the problems of life are simply because of the disease of avidya. Avidya means nessians. I do not know what is reality. Something temporary, something illusion. I am taking as reality. So this illusion can be completely removed. Chaito Dharpana Marjanam by taking this medicine of Hare Krishna Mahamantra but it has to be taken with adharad Anudinam. We have to do it regularly with great vow. These many rounds this much I will chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra every day. And we have to be doing it with great care and attention. And if you do following all the instructions of the previous verses as Sri Lank Goswami has explained the six principles of satsang in the association of devotees. Avoiding the six activities which harm the devotional service. Following the six principles which enhance devotional service then very soon a person is able to come out of this avidya and please go through the purport of this verse also. Verse number seven Prabhupada very beautifully explains how a person grows in spiritual life. So a person can start with little faith. Just you have faith in the doctor, you have faith in ayurveda just see the snake bite got removed by chanting mantras and herbs. So let me try this for my spiritual life also it is mentioned in the same vedas. And with little faith if you start chanting then we will see the results of the chanting. And when we see the results of the chanting then our faith increases. And when the faith further increases then the person surrenders to spiritual master. That yes the process which you have recommended suggested it is very nice. It seems to be working. Now I want to completely follow this process. Just like a patient surrenders to doctor. Doctor now you please open my heart, open my whatever body and please fix it up. Please relieve me of this tumor. Unless he surrenders he cannot get cured. So unless somebody surrenders to spiritual master that spiritual master please guide me every moment of my life. I am willing to plan as per your guidance. Now please get me relieved from all these anxieties of life. From repeated death, disease, anxiety, old age, all these problems. When a person surrenders then he takes deeksha initiation and from here actually the Hare Krishna Mahamantra starts acting very very effectively in the life of devotee. So in the association of devotees he does Bhajan Kriya taken initiation from the spiritual master. Then he becomes fixed up in spiritual life. And when he becomes fixed up in spiritual life very soon he starts getting taste in spiritual life. And this taste increases to ecstasy. That is called bhava or emotions for Krishna when he starts feeling a very strong attachment for Krishna emotions, ecstasy for Krishna. On this bhava stage Srila Prabhupada explains a person understands who is God, a person understands what is Maya. And on this platform Maya cannot affect. All the suffering is just because of this material energy Maya. But Krishna surya sama Maya hai Andakar wherever there is Krishna, there is no question of Maya. Thus when one devotee was telling that Prabhupada sometimes the devotees think that they are more unhappy because materialist at least he does not know this is avidya I have to do something else, I'm not doing it. But devotee understands that the nature of this material world is miserable. So sometimes devotees appear to be more miserable than the materialist because they are blissful in ignorance. So Prabhupada told no, if a devotee is not happy, it means he is not a devotee. He has not yet begun his spiritual life. So if a person follows all the rules and regulations very nicely, devotee will always be joyful, always be blissful. So otherwise a person has not even begun his spiritual life. He is simply cheating. He is not following the process very nicely. So happiness, complete freedom from all these disturbances it is a symptom that a person is situated in Krishna consciousness. So it is very very simple. Any suffering in life is because of absence of Krishna. Krishna surya Sama Maya darkness cannot stand when there is sunlight. Similarly no miseries in the life can stay when there is awakening of Krishna consciousness. So simply we should try to awaken Krishna consciousness. And if we are always Krishna conscious, there is no scope of Maya. And then the person is always happy. So these are very, very nice, very powerful instructions. Just I request all of you to please follow this simple thing. But unfortunately either we are not regular with our practices or we don't do these practices with care and attention. Krishna personally has come in the form of holy name. We should try to be respectful. We should try to be welcoming, try to be very grateful that Krishna has come in this mood. We should try to practice. Take this medicine. Then this medicine will no longer be bitter. This medicine will be relishable. And tadgadha mulhantri means the root cause of this disease. It is this ignorance avidya of the heart. It is completely destroyed. And a person will experience an extraordinary form of happiness which he has never experienced before. So now we have brought practical application of Krishna consciousness for all of you. Krishna's holy names. They can be chanted on beads and they can be sung, chanted, heard along with musical instruments. Also now we'll be playing a kirtan. So I request all of you to kindly hear it very very attentively. And then with respect, with care and attention try to repeat in the same tune as the lead singer is singing here. So try to follow this process attentively for next few minutes and after that if you have any questions and answers I'll be glad to answer them. Questions I'll be glad to answer them. So let us enjoy the kirtan now. Hari krishna krishna krishna Ha. It's not the night sai hallel. It's not just not just Yah but I'm it's Yahoo like it's not how they malik Hare Krishna. So let us have some questions now. I think already we have some. So first question is from Bodha Ram Rao Hare Krishna prabhu hare Krishna please clear my doubt how to understand chanting Hare Krishna mantra is service to Lord because chanting is for purification of one's contamination. Please clarify prabhu. Nice question. So Prabhupada says yes. In our conditioned stage. It is Chaito Dharpana Marjanam. It is for our purification. But there are different stages of chanting. So actually Hare Krishna Mahamantra is chanted by liberated souls nivritta, Tarishai, Upagi, Amanad, Bhava, Shadash, Rotu, Manovhiramat who have no trishna, no hankering to enjoy this material world such people can enjoy chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra. Nevertheless it is beneficial for everyone even those who are full of Trishnas. So in our situation we are all materialists. We have some material desires. So when we chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra it is cleansing of the heart which is happening. But when a person chants offenselessly the name of Hare Krishna Mahamantra Shuddhanama, then that is service to Krishna and how that is service. So even in mundane sense we can understand. If somebody is singing chanting your name you feel very good. And on the absolute platform the understanding is Abhinathwam namanaminoho. There is no difference between Krishna and his holy name. So when you are chanting the name Krishna then you are actually serving Krishna. You are associating with Krishna. When you meet any person, he feels happy. Isn't it? So Krishna and his name there is no difference at all. So when you are chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra you are having intimate association with Krishna and offering service to Krishna. So these are the activities of spiritual platform. Prabhupada gives the example. Mango, mango, mango. Water, water, water. You chant here you will not taste mango. You will not be able to quench your thirst. But in spiritual world if you chant water then it is as good as drinking water. If you chant mango then it is as good as tasting mango. You will get the same pleasure of putting mango on your tongue or chanting mango's name. So in a similar fashion when you are chanting Hare Krishna you are actually serving Krishna's body personally or chanting Krishna's name. It has the same effect, gives same ecstasy to Krishna and to the living entity. These are the dynamics of spiritual life. Next question is by Virendra Ekbote. Why do some devotees fall from bhakti due to them being getting puffed up in their devotional service. Sorry. How to remain humble, steady and determined by progressing in our Bhakti. So your question how to remain humble is being answered everywhere. By Chaitanyma Prabhu, by Krishna Kaviraj, Goswami, all the devotees by Srila Prabhupada, by constant chanting of the Hare Krishna Mahamantra if you are not constantly in touch with Krishna then pride all these things they will enter the heart. So that is why when we do offenses in the devotional service we are not careful of avoiding offenses. Our devotional service may get choked. So thus sometimes we may fall down from the spiritual life and we fall down also because of lack of devotee association or because of committing vaishnavaprad. So if you are having association of devotees and if you don't commit Vaishna offenses and if you always chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra we will be able to maintain determination, enthusiasm and steadiness in Krishna consciousness all the while remaining humble. Next is by Joti Takna prabhu. In Bhagavad Gita nine text it is stated that faith in Krishna is also divided into three stages and described in Srimad Bhagavatam. Could you please share your views, thoughts or something on above? So faith is in rajoguna, faith is in Tamuguna, faith is in Satvoguna. So it is explained just like a person who is or even animal you can consider who are thamsik rabbit. The typical example is given when the rabbit is attacked by hunter. Then rabbit closes its eyes and rabbit becomes very happy that hunter is gone. This is rabbit's faith that by closing my eyes the problem is solved. So those people who follow escapism want to avoid problem. So they are having faith in Tamaguna and faith in rajoguna. Similarly a person thinks sense enjoyment will make me happy. That is called faith in rajoguna and Satvik faith means no sense enjoyment but sense control will make me happy. That is faith in Satvaguna and transcendental faith means only service of Krishna will make me happy. In this way faith is divided in rajoguna, Satvaguna, Tamaguna. So Tamsik people they cannot put faith in Vishnu. It is not possible for them or Krishna. So that is why for them other deities are there. The Ghastly forms are there kal Bharav form or the Kali form, Chandi form they can worship them and so that gradually they can be elevated to higher platform of rajoguna eventually satbaguna and then after maybe many many millions of lives they can become devotees. Similarly Rajasic person. He worships Lord Brahma. Lord Shiva. Or like that Satvik person Satvik Puranas. So they all recommend worship of Lord Ganesha in between our worship Lord Vishnu in between our worship of Lord Ganesha, Lord Surya like that so basis a person faith which depends upon the modes of nature he has acquired different things are suggested to a person which is mentioned in Bhagavad Gita. Next question is by Ajay Raj Sharma. What is meant by bhakti? What is the definition? What is the meaning of Jeevan Mukt? Very nice question. So the definition of Bhakti there are two prominent definitions which are explained by Narad Muni and Rupa Goswami. Sarvapadhi vinar muktam tat parathwena nirmalam Rishikesha rishi keshevanam bhaktir uchate Narad muni describes sarvapadhi vinir muktam. When a person becomes freed from all the designation now I'm thinking I am rich, I am beautiful, I am intelligent or I am dull, I'm ugly, I'm American, I'm Indian, I'm man, I'm woman, I'm Hindu, I am Christian, I'm this thing. These are all designations which are given to us externally. So when a person becomes free from all the designation understands I am not the body, I am spirit, soul, Mama, Ivanshu Ji Viloka. I am part and parcel of God Krishna. I am servant of Krishna. So when a person establishes himself in this original identity he is called Mukta. Mukta means mukti hitva. Anyatharupayana swarupayana vyavasthiti hitva means give up. Give up anitharupayana give up other designations which you pick up as per the body you have acquired and Swarupayana Vyavasthiti being established in your own spiritual identity, spiritual form. So when a person is freed from all these external designations intelligence, wisdom, richness, beauty, wealth, renunciation all these designations have to be given up. They pertain only to body and mind. And Tat parathwena nirmalam rishi kena Rishikesha sevanam a person in this consciousness he engages himself in the service of Krishna. That is called bhakti. When a person understands I am not the body, the senses, body, everything, they belong to Krishna. So let me use them in the service of Krishna. This is called bhakti. If your senses have got the capacity have got the inclination of fighting you fight for Krishna. Like Arjuna. That becomes Bhakti. If your mind body has orientation of teaching, you teach. For Krishna that becomes Bhakti. Your mind body cannot do anything but clean the street. You clean the street for Krishna that becomes Bhakti. So the senses have to be engaged in the service of Krishna either directly in the service of Krishna or when the senses are engaged elsewhere the result of that activity is offered to Krishna completely then that is called Bhakti. This is the definition. And in a similar fashion, Srila rUK Goswami explains what is that verse? Prabhu how does it start? rUK Goswami's verse. Anya Vilashita Shunyam yes anya Bilashita Shunyam gyan Karmadi Anavritam so we have various desires abhilashas when all the desires are finished in the life. And Gyan Karmadi Anavritam a person usually when we take up to Bhakti most of the people they take to Bhakti. Even though they are fortunate, it is good they are approaching Krishna but they have some fruitive desires. If I do Bhakti, I will get this thing in my life. So that is called Karma contamination. Karma means when you do some activity to get some result. Bhakti means when you do some activity simply to please Krishna to offer result to Krishna. So this is Karma contamination. I want to serve Krishna so that I may have financial stability, I may have physical stability, emotional stability, some stability or result enjoyment in material life. So a person should not fall for Karma contamination and a person can have Jnana contamination. I want to understand this thing. I am following Krishna consciousness so that I can understand, I can have practical realization, knowledge of the opulences of God or understand how I am not the body or getting any kind of knowledge. This is called gnana contamination. So Gyani wants to liberate himself from material world, wants to stop the process of birth and death. So the devotee does not want this Gyan, this knowledge of liberation, freedom from birth and death also this is called Gnana contamination. Whatever Gyna, whenever Krishna has to give, let him give or let him not give. I just want to engage in service of Krishna for the pleasure of Krishna. I have no abhilasha either Gyana contamination, liberation from birth and death, understanding my position, Krishna's position or getting some results out of Bhakti anavritam ANU Kulayana Krishnam bhaktir Uttama this is called pure devotional service. When a person is completely freed from the desires of liberation or of fruitive results and they just want to please Krishna by engaging in the service. These are the two prominent definitions of Bhakti and what is the meaning of Jeevan Mukta? So a person who is completely engaged in Bhakti, he is called Jeevan Mukta. Ya Yahare dasi karmana manasa gira nikhilaswapi avastasu jeevan Mukta sauchyate a person who is engaged in the service of Krishna with his mind body words karmana manasa gira nikhila swati avastasu means in all situations, all circumstances. Not that when I get time, I do bhakti. No whether I have time or not, if I don't have time, let me starve, let me suffer. But I should not compromise on my Bhakti. I will continue my bhakti. So not conditional Bhakti but in all situation mind body, words are engaged only in the service of Krishna. No activities performed by mind, body and words in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved. Then such a person is called Jeevan Mukta. He is not acting under control of material energy but he is liberated. He is directly acting under Krishna's spiritual energy. And when a person is acting on this Jeevan Mukta stage then even though he appears to be situated in this material world actually he is liberated. He's living in spiritual world. So we all wish to attain that platform by practicing Krishna consciousness. Next is by Virendra egbote is reading Hari Vansha prescribed along with reading of important Krishna conscious literature such as Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam and Chaitanya Charitamrita in Krishna consciousness. So the scriptures should be read which are given by the spiritual master. And I think if you are able to finish even reading of Prabhupada's books nicely it is a very laudable effort. And actually if you want to have realization of spiritual life then the same book has to be studied many many times in the association of devotees. So thus one relation of spiritual life is chaitanya. Mahaprabhu has mentioned in Nectar of devotion. It is mentioned reading too many books is an impediment for spiritual advancement. Spiritual realization does not happen by reading many many books. But repeating limited number of books is studying same number of books in a repeated way. So I think if we are able to study even few books of Prabhupada that is a great success of life. So I don't think we have time for reading other things. So we should try to be chaste stick to the books of spiritual master. Although those literatures are also authorized. Ajay Rash Sharma is having next question how we can pragmatically spiritualize everything we do? So we just discussed in the definition of Bhakti by engaging either directly in the service of Krishna or offering the results of our activity for Krishna. Now we offer the results for our enjoyment or our extended enjoyment for our family, nation or like that. If we use that in the service of Krishna then that becomes the greatest service for ourselves, for the people who are connected to us, for the entire humanity, entire nation, all the living entities. And that becomes bhakti. In this way pragmatically we can do Bhakti in our life. Just work directly for Krishna like Arjuna directly fought for Krishna. Or if we are soldier, we are fighting somewhere. We are teacher, we are businessmen. We are doing some activity. We get some result from that activity. Some money, some remuneration. We can use that in the service of Krishna. This is called the application of Bhakti. Next is by Virendrag Bhoti. What is the actual process by which Nam Prabhu or Holy Name, Holy Names transforms a devotee's material body and death to his original spiritual sachidanand body and spiritual world? So not necessarily that we have to wait for death. Prabhupada tells if somebody is sincere as one. Prabhuji asked question here jeevan Mukta Sauchate even in this life we can be liberated. That should be the aspiration of devotee not to take grace marks at death and somehow do be very very sincere in this life. Let us try to come to that platform. And how does that happen? It is explained again by the Goswamis. Prabhupada explains iron rod in fire. Iron rod when put in fire for a long time continuously if you don't keep on pouring water on it, keep in contact with fire, the iron rod becomes fire like. It also starts emanating heat and light and it will also burn in a similar fashion. If we keep constant touch with Krishna, the entire mind body becomes completely spiritualized and thus we are liberated even while we are visible on this material platform. Next question is by Neha bhagane. How can we measure our spiritual growth? What parameters one should look for Hare Krishna. So again it is being described very nicely Tushti pushti Shuddhapayo Nughasam if a person is engaged in eating food then he gets taste, he gets nourishment he feels strength and satiation of hunger. In a similar fashion when a person is advancing in Krishna consciousness he feels taste in all the spiritual practices as Ru Goswami is mentioning here swadhvik kramadi tadgadha Moolhantri a person will get taste in Krishna consciousness. So the activities which may appear to be little tasteful or even bitter completely distasteful will appear very very tasteful. More and more tasteful. That means we are advancing in Krishna consciousness. So one thing is when we eat food we get taste and what else do we get? We get strength. When you fast one day then you feel so weak and as soon as you eat food you get strength. So now we feel very weak. I know this is wrong, I should not do but material energy forces me to do wrong sinful activities sense enjoyment I get strength to counter stand against the force of material nature I become strong. This is another symptom of spiritual advancement and what else do you have when you eat food? Shudapayonughasam shuddha the hunger is eliminated now we are very hungry. Oh give me satisfaction of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin, belly etc. So this hunger will no longer be there. Just like Dhru Maharaj was so hungry he wanted a kingdom bigger than Brahma also. But when actually he became situated in meditation upon Lord Vishnu then he tells Swami and Kritar to ask me Varam Nayache. So I wanted to have a very big kingdom tapasis titoham's thanavilashi I wanted a very huge palace. Huge kingdom bigger than Brahma also. But now that I have got you I am completely satisfied. I do not want anything else. So by advancement in Krishna consciousness a person does not want anything else in life. So these are the symptoms explained for spiritual advancement and of course there are other symptoms. There is growth of knowledge, there is growth in conviction. Nobody can shake your faith rather you can convince others by all these things we can measure our spiritual advancement. Next is by Saranya Ramamurthy is it mandate that we should visualize Krishna while chanting? Please clarify no, no it is not a mandate at all. Rather Srila Prabhupada explains acharya has explained we should not artificially try to think of Krishna's form. Although there is no difference between form, name pastimes activities of Krishna still Krishna is more easily accessible in the form of his incarnation of Holy Name. So if I am visualizing Krishna directly so that may not lead to spiritual advancement for ordinary people for a liberated person there is no difference but for us we have to focus more on the Holy Name and then effortlessly if Krishna's form is coming, that is very good rather that should happen. The result of proper chanting and hearing is a person will be able to do Smaranam. Prabhupada explains unless chanting and hearing is matured, a person cannot do Smaranam, cannot come to third platform. So we aspire for that platform. That is Krishna consciousness thinking of Krishna at every second. But this cannot be attained artificially. This can happen only when Krishna and spiritual master are pleased. When our chanting and hearing is perfect. So try to chant each and every word very nicely with attention, with regularity, with love, gratitude and then automatically we'll be able to remember Krishna. That is a natural sequence. Next question is by Ajayra Sharma. Why God says in Bhagavad Gita that he strengthens the faith of person in the celestial God or Devta which he worships when He Himself is the supreme. Because Krishna is very kind, Father, he does not take away our free will. He has given us this freedom, he does not force us. You love me, you surrender unto Me no. He is very kind. He tells I am the only person who can offer you real love. You will be satisfied only in relationship with Me. But if you want to enjoy elsewhere, you can go. So if you have material desires so he's so kind Father. Unless we have strong faith, how we can worship any Devta? So Krishna guides from within the heart you have this desire, worship this Devata. You want to have very nice wife. You worship the Apsaras. You want to have nice health. You worship Ashwin Kumaras. You want to become Hero, you worship Rudra incarnations. You want to have something worship some other demigods like that. But if a person is sincere, I want to know what is truth. I want to have the greatest happiness in life. Then Krishna guides him to pure devotional service. So we should be very very sincere. We should not desire. Krishna knows he is kind. Father. What we need, what we don't need, we should simply ask Krishna krishna, please guide me on the best path. If you don't understand that pure devotional service surrender to Krishna love of God. That is the aim of life. This understanding also comes after some spiritual practice. At least this we can pray that Krishna please guide me to the best path. Please give me the best boon and then Krishna will guide us towards Himself. Next question is by Vinayak Charas here. What can I attitude be there while chanting Maha mantra? Can we think of Lord Krishna's lotus feet? I think I just answered that question. Next is by Ashwin Srinivasan. Hare Krishna is understanding correct that Maya will be always there. But by always associating of Krishna through chanting of Hare Krishna Mahamantra we can get rid of Maya. You are very right in your understanding and in the scriptures it is mentioned Maya is like shadow. The shadow happens because of the presence of sun only. And sun and shadow are always there together. But if you are looking towards the sun, then you are free from the influence of shadow. The darkness of shadow. So Maya always exists. Maya is also eternal. As soon as we forget Krishna, we are captured by Maya. And if we are always serving Krishna chanting his names then we are away from Maya. Next question is by Rohit Valerao. Hare Krishna prabhuji. I am chanting regularly for six months. But many thoughts other than Sri Krishna such as work to do's go through my mind. Is it the result of my impurities bad karma of the past life? Yes, that is a fact. Because of the bad karma of the past life, because of the impurities we have a disturbed mind. So that is why this chanting of Hare Krishna Mahamantra is also the remedy to get rid of all the past sinful activities. So at least now we don't commit sinful activities. So that our mind is peaceful. Follow all the previous instructions mentioned in this nectar of instruction. Then our mind will be peaceful and will be able to follow Krishna consciousness. So do not worry. Six months is not a very big time. Try to stick to this process. Take guidance of the devotees and slowly mind will become more and more peaceful and focused. So thank you so much for all the nice questions. Please keep on chanting. Chanting. Please do not neglect it. Do not be neglectful. Do not be inattentive. Try to always have a desire to improve your chanting quality and all the spiritual activities sustain on the basis of good chanting. We'll meet again very soon. Thank you so much for hearing Hare Krishna.