Omaghyana timirandasya ganan janashalakaya chakshurun militamyana tasma shri Guru namah namam vishnu padaya Krishna prashtai abhutali Shrimat bhakti vedanta Swamin itinamine namaste sarasvate gauravani pracharine nirvish shunivadi pashatyadeshatarina Jay sri krishna chaitanya prabhu nityananda Sri advaita Gadadhar shivasadi gaura Bhaktivrinda namo Mahavadanya Krishna Prayam pradayati Krishna krishna chaitanya namne gora tushanama namo brahmanyadev Ayago brahma hitai jagad hitai Krishna Govindai namo Namha. Hey Krishna karunasindho dina bandho Jagatpate Gopesha gopika kanta radha kanta namastuthe Tapta kanchana Gaurangi radhevrinda vaneshwari rishabhanu sute devi pranamami haripriya wancha Kalpat. Today we are going to discuss something of paramount importance. Some thought which can be considered revolutionary from the current perspective and an understanding which is very, very important and fundamental to have any kind of happiness in life whether spiritual or even material. And even the materialists have also realized this aspect to some extent. Like Winston Churchill, a famous statesman, he said for the first 25 years of my life I wanted freedom. For the next 25 years of my life I wanted order. This is what we generally do. Initially we want freedom. Just like kids. They don't want to listen to parents. They want to enjoy. Let them play entire day. And when they are young, they are a rebel. They want to break all the rules. But when they grow up, they become little sober and they realize no order is important in life. And then Winston Churchill says for the next 25 years I realized that order is freedom. So first we want freedom, then we want order. And then he said, we realize that order is freedom. So a very beautiful shloka is explained by Shukdea Goswami to Maharaj Parikshit. Shukhdev Goswami was a liberated soul from the birth. And Maharaj Parikshit who was about to die in seven days he was hearing the terrible situation of the conditioned soul how they suffer so much in this material world. And he's asking please help me, my spiritual master. How can I help them? How can we alleviate the sufferings of such conditioned souls? Although he is going to die in seven days but he is very much concerned and he is not asking about himself but he's asking about other conditioned souls. This is the nature of a devotee for his life. There is no problem. Parishit Maharaj was such a powerful king. He was such a powerful devotee. He could have counteracted the curse that he got to die in seven days. But that is the nature of a devotee. He is always dependent on the will of the Supreme Lord. Anyway, I'm going to die in seven days. So the purpose of this life is to perfect Krishna consciousness. So let me do that. It is good. I've got notice that you have seven days time. Now you perfect your Krishna consciousness. If death comes without notice and you are not prepared then that is a greater loss. So he asked Sukdea Goswami that please tell me how we can help these conditioned living entities. To come out of suffering then gradually Shukte Goswami is building up upon the remedial measures how to help the living entities here and Shukda Goswami mentions in six Kanto of Bhagavatam this is very beautiful, Shloka. Six Canto first chapter text number twelve shukda Goswami mentions NA ashnata pathyam avanam vyadhayo abhi Bhavantihi avam niyamakrit rajan shanai shemaya kalpati what does it mean? Pathya means the food which is good for our health Pathya and apathya there are two kinds of foodstuffs so Shugdha Goswami is mentioning NA Ashna so Ayurveda says if your lifestyle is regulated that is our topic for today if your food is regulated, then what is the need of medicine? And if your lifestyle is not regulated then what even a medicine can do? So sometimes people tell Ayurveda does not work that is for two reasons yes, we may not be having experts also but still why it is working so much? Another thing is ayurveda works on the people who are regulated in their life ahar nidra Brahmacharya so a regulated person when he takes Ayurveda with a proper expert it will work so here Shukta Goswami is telling ayurveda will tell you so modern concepts are that do not eat and starve and do all these things. But Prabhupada mentions ayurvedic science is so nice indian culinary art is so nice you can eat the most tastiest of the food. Items. The spices are so nicely made, given to us, this Pak shastra, that you can have the tastiest of the food items and you can avoid the diseases. If there is some disease because of overconsumption of milk that can be cured by consumption of curd, which is another transformation of milk. So one who knows the science of food items can have good food items, but it should be taken under proper direction. So here in the Shloka Srila Prabhupada points out just like a physician will tell you to take these kind of food items when you are sick and he will tell you, please avoid these other food items. This niyama is very, very important regulation. Is very much important. If you regulate your lifestyle and diet as per the advice of a physician, you will not fall sick and that we have experienced. You eat food items, those which are healthy for you. Then you eat them the way. Don't overstuff yourself. We will not fall sick. We will be healthy. And if you go for enjoyment, eat whatever, whenever we like. Then we will fall sick. So Avam niyamakrit rajan shanaik shemaya kalpate avam. Niyamakrit in this way. If a person regulates himself then shanai gradually shemaya kalpate he will approach the path of perfect happiness. So many people they explain that yes. We should have a regulated lifestyle. That is important for happiness. But the purpose for which the vedas prescribe regulation is something different today's session is not to tell you that yes you please follow all these rules and regulations by this you will be able to control mind have a peaceful situation. And then you continue. Have a very happy, live happily ever after. No. The Vedic civilization, all these rules and regulations. Shastra means regulation. It has come from shastu. Shast means to control or to regulate. So all these shastras prescribe various rules and regulations. They control us and they don't tell us yes. You will live happily here ever after. The Shastras tell us you cannot live here happily. That is why follow these rules and regulations. So this is the difference between Shughudya Goswami and Winston Churchill or any other materialist who may also recommend some regulations in lifestyle. Why people would follow so many regulations? It is explained when Dashat Maharaj was approached by Vishwamitar Muni to kill the demons who were disturbing the Yajna sacrifice so whenever we meet somebody, we usually ask so how are you doing? How is your family doing? How your children are doing? But then this Vishwamitramuni is a sage he has no wife, no children, no family then what to ask? What are you doing? No so something is asked from such people who are in ancients and what is Maharashtra tells ayistad yatat punar janma jayaya how is your struggles endeavor going on? To win over this process of repeated birth and death so this is the aim of life the Sages the Vedic civilization varnashrama Dharma Brahmana kshatriya Vaishya Shudra it is meant for regulating our life just like we have different standards nursery higher classes graduate postgraduate in a similar fashion. It begins with the Shudra level. Shudra means the living entity who is highly tamsik cannot follow many rules and regulations. And what is the first rule and regulation? So that is also described by Shukhde Goswami in the next verse in this verse Shukda Goswami tells so the living entity, in order to solve the problems of life under the guidance of an expert man of knowledge, has to regulate his lifestyle and what are the regulations that he has to follow that he is explained? Next verse onwards verse number 13 tapasa brahmacharayana shamayana damayanacha the first regulation is tapasya what is tapasya? Tapasya means voluntarily accepting discomforts in life what are the comforts of our life? Ahar nidra BHA mathanamcha ahar. We like to eat very nicely. Voraciously. Whenever we want all the tasty things and we want to sleep. Oh, today there is no work. Today's weekend let us sleep as much as possible. Ahar nidra and then a person wants to enjoy Mathun sex pleasure. That is the greatest driving force, the most downloadable content on the internet that is all about enjoying sex life. So these are the things which we are very fond of. It gives us lot of enjoyment and comfort. So tapasya means denial of these things. Deny, deny food, deny sleep and deny sex. So Shudra cannot follow this great tapasya brahmacharya. So at least the tapasya of grahast Ashram is recommended to Shudra in the Vedic culture. So it is not by any caste system that your surname is this you are a Shudra, you do this, you will never be allowed to know. Just like a boy is in fifth standard, if he clears the syllabus, he goes to 6th standard, 7th, 8th, 9th. Like this he progresses. So it is told in the Vedas, if a person is Ashudrani Dai Shudra, he will be given punishment. He's supposed to elevate himself. So this elevation happens by this rules and regulations. Shudra just follow grahast ashram, you are little more advanced. Vaishya business class, mercantile community farmers, they are supposed to follow Brahmacharya also. So you follow Brahmacharya and then you difficult where you have to leave house. This is actual civilization. The whole civilization is directed towards Tapasya denial, denial of comforts of life, progressive denial. So, first of all, take training in the Brahmachary Ashram and understand the importance of Tapasya practice denial of sense objects. If you are not able to do okay, go into grahastha life, and then you experience that whether this enjoyment of senses satisfy you and a person will tell yes, it does not satisfy. Then he can move on to Vanaprastha. Vanapastha means one are going to jungle. Every respectable man in Vedic culture, he is supposed to go to jungle to perfect his life by following Tapasya. So that is not recommended. But for Vaishyas that is recommended for Kshatriyas administrative class, the rulers, they are advanced enough to follow the austerities of Vanaprastha. And if a Kshatriya is able to elevate himself, like we are talking about Vishwamitramuni, they are allowed and they are recommended to even transcend this third level of Varnashrama vanaprastha. And finally, take sannyas. Sannyas means social death. In Van prastha person can live with wife, with his spouse, but Sannyas means social death. No more connections and complete austerity, living in forests, in isolation or in holy Dharma, practicing devotional service. So such a person who is a sannyasi, what we can talk with him? So Dashat Maharaj is asking yes, why people take sanyas? Why people follow these regulations? The purpose is of all these rules and regulations in Vedic culture, people have so many rules. Why these religions they recommend so many rules and regulations? No scientific, no, there is scientific basis. People may not understand. People are not there who can explain nicely. The purpose is Punar Janma jayaya the purpose is to win over this process of repeated birth and death. To this end, people would take so much hardship and regulate their life, so that there is freedom from birth and death, and even apart leave freedom from birth and death even in this life. This concept is very important. If at all we want happiness, we have to follow Tapasya. We have to follow this denial. We have to regulate our life without regulation. Just like even an ordinary person, he does not regulate himself. No, I will not take any license for opening shops. I will not follow the traffic rules and regulations. I will not follow the norms of society in which we are living. Then he cannot be happy. He would be punished because of breach of the laws. In a similar fashion there are laws which are existing in this world. So regulation is very very important in life. And the first regulation is tapasya. Tapasya means voluntarily accepting discomfort in life. So even though a person is not developed to the understanding that punar Janma jayaya I have to win over the process of burden death. I am eternal soul. Still we can understand by little practice and practical personal experience a person becomes very very happy when he does tapasya. So there is no need to worry. Somebody may ask if I do tapasya punar Janma Jaya, then how can I enjoy these amazing pleasures which this world has to offer? Life will become very very rigid. This is too tough. People think, oh, if I can have animal life like animals, dogs, they enjoy so much. Enjoying sex life in the street without any restriction. That would be my happiness. So Prabhupada was preaching in one class that human form of life is very valuable. It is just like a junction. You can decide you want to go to a better body or you can degrade to animal species. You should be scared. You can even become dog if you are not careful. So somebody among the audience, he asked that what is the harm in becoming dog? I can become dog in next life. And they think, oh, becoming dog is very good. I will enjoy sex in the open without marriage, no responsibility, no headache of taking care of children, raising them and insurance policies and loans and all such headache just enjoy in the street and then forget. It is such a nice life. But they don't see the other part of dog's life. How much he suffers. So just like somebody is giving you knowledge. See there is no God in picture. We have come from monkeys, monkey. Slowly, slowly he became human being. And then big bang. And what is all that higgs boson and other things. They are talking. He is giving you wonderful knowledge. And then he's doing something. What he is doing? He's putting few spoonfuls in fire. So you're asking sir, very good. Thank you for so much for your knowledge. But what are you doing? What are you putting in fire? No, I am trying to put off the fire. Oh, you are trying to put off the fire. What are you putting in that? I am putting butter in that. You'll tell foolish man you want to put off the fire by putting butter in that. So shall we believe any theories preached by such a person? Not at all. He's a foolish man. He wants to put a fire by putting butter in it. So that is why we don't give any credence to any knowledge given by the materialists because they do not understand this material enjoyment does not give happiness. Your senses demand like burning fire. Please give me sense objects. And if you put the sense object into fire, you think if I become dog, I will enjoy sex with six partners? You will not be satisfied with six partners. You want eight partners, you enjoy with eight, you want ten partners. This is the nature of material enjoyment. The more you put the sense objects in the senses, the fire increases, it burns even more vigorously. It demands more you put more, it burns more vigorously. So a person who does not have this sense, who is trying to extinguish fire by putting butter drops into it, he is totally foolish man. That is what Palad Maharaj tells noonam Pramata kuruta vikarma yad indria pritaya apranothi Nunam means definitely Pramata means super madman. Yad indria prithaya apranothi who is spending his life for sense enjoyment. He's a super madman. Super madman means trying to put up fire by putting butter into it. So that is why we should not think. If I follow a life of tapasya, I will suffer in material life. This is Vedic civilization. All the children, they were sent to Gurukul just to learn tapasya, just to follow Brahmachari. Brahmachari means Guru kulai vasandanto guru hitam he lives in the Gurukula, away from the house because house so many comforts are there. Children want toys now we want to give toys to our children. We want to give very nice things to feed them. We are giving them all luxuries. Please take this thing also take guitar, also learn this thing and let us go abroad and enjoy. We want to give all enjoyment to our children. And the result of this enjoyment is that children are also becoming depressed in life. That is what western countries have experienced who have no dearth of enjoyment to give to their children. Whereas Vedic culture children are happy because they are following tapasya because the fire is coming down. You don't put butter into fire, fire will come down, disturbance will come down and the person would be happy. So Rishabh Dev gave this instruction. Lord, Rishabh Dev is incarnation of Krishna. He was also a king and if somebody is king, he would like to continue in his big palace. He was king of the whole world. But he has preached by his example purpose of life is not to enjoy because anyway you cannot enjoy. So he was going to jungle to take sannyas and the first, last instruction that he gave to his sons it is the duty of father to instruct the son not instruct in BTEC, MTech and MBBS and all these things and again engage him in same thing material enjoyment and thus put him into more miseries. Father means janani Nasasyat. Nasasyad guru nasasyad nayad mo chate samupiyatamrityam. You should be able to deliver your son from the clutches of death. That is responsibility of father. If you do not have this capacity, we should not become father. That is what vedas tell Janaini Nasasaya. Don't become mother. Don't become father. Don't become guru. If you cannot relieve your dependence from the clutches of death, death has to be solved. Disease. These are real problems which has to be solved once and for all. So that is why keeping this duty in mind he is giving very valuable instructions to his children. His hundred sons. And the first of these instruction is NA ayam deho dehe bhajam niriloke kashtan kaman arhate vidbujami. We are all human beings. What is the purpose of human life? Kashtan taking so much trouble we are all so much troubled in our life working very very hard for what Kaman? Just to fulfill the material desires. And we think this enjoyment is very great enjoyment. But he's telling Vidbujami vid bhujami stool eating pig. A pig who is eating stool, he is also having enjoyment. So we are working hard to have the level of enjoyment which pigs and dogs are enjoying. No, human life is not meant for such low grade enjoyment. In human life you can unlock a very great potential of pleasure. And what is that pleasure? Yasmad brahmasakyam to Anantam. This pleasure is very very temporary. What we are enjoying even if we become most successful of the successful people of the world. Like yesterday. One devotee shared with me on WhatsApp one post describing how the captain the most successful captain of the most successful cricket team of the world he has admitted he was feeling the loneliest person in the world few years ago when he had a bad career when he was out of form. So he is the best batsman of the world. He is the best captain of the world leading the best team of the world. How many people are able to play cricket in a country? Just eleven people. And he is the leader among the eleven. And not just leader, all time leader. Hardly people have seen such a person, such a maestro, but even such a person who is extraordinarily accomplished, having extraordinary wife, who is also a celebrity. And you may think, oh, life is success. He's having money, he's having name, he's having fame, but we don't see behind the curtain. And he admitted, and another great batsman, he has applauded that this happens with all of us. So he's very brave, that he has admitted. So please don't get carried away by the profiles on Instagram and Facebook and social media that people are happy. Understand from the Vedic sciences, if a person is not satvik, he has not elevated himself to satvic energy by doing tapasya or devotional platform, which is much higher. There is no question of happiness. No question of happiness. The more a person is materialistic, he works hard for material enjoyment. It is like putting butter in fire. Fire is burning more and more, he wants more. And when he's not able to perform, not able to satisfy depression and chaos, So thus depression is a norm in the society. Why it is a norm? Because people are putting butter into fire. It is common sense. This is called maya. There is no enjoyment actually in material life there is only suffering. Why people are becoming entrepreneurs? Why many many startups are happening? Because there is problem. They solve the problem and thus they become successful industrialists, entrepreneurs. So why so many companies are coming up? Because there is problem and they are solving the problem. There are unlimited problems. Unlimited companies are coming up. So simply if we are able to solve some problem apply, we think we are happy. But please understand what is this education system? What is this training we have got and we are passing on to next generation. You become successful like that captain or the scientist or entertainer? The best entertainer, best scientist, best CEO all of them have experienced enormous depression in their lives. Then why we are putting ourselves in other ends to depression? Pashyanapina Pashyati. This is called Pramata super mad civilization. Even though we see but we are not able to understand. So in order to come to the platform of sanity this Tapasya is required if we are into addiction addiction is not just of drugs and alcohol. Any kind of sense enjoyment is addiction. We all understand we don't need it. But once you have it, you want more of it. So entire this business of sense enjoyment is that of addiction. An addicted person will remain in hallucination, will not understand reality. So to solve the problems of life first of all come to platform of sanity. And that platform can be attained by following Tapasya. So we should not think if I follow Tapasya then who has seen next birth? In this life I will suffer. No, in this life you will enjoy. That is why Brahmanas, they are very very happy and satisfied. Sanyasis he is living in jungle without any comfort. The king is going to jungle. Do you think he is going to suffer over there? No, there is no suffering. That is why they don't come back. They realize oh, life is so nice now. So when you deny the sense objects it is not that when you deny your resources or other things it is not that we are losing something. Yes we are losing. But what is the experience of such losing? Scriptures give very vivid example. That experience is like you lose the digested foodstuff in the morning after evacuation you feel great relief. In a similar fashion when you deny these addictive sense objects there is great relief and happiness in life. But for this this Brahmacharya training tapasya begins with Brahmacharya. It is very important. Unfortunately it is not there in the society now. So regulations they begin with Tapasya. So we have to practice. So don't worry. There is no enjoyment in material life. Little. If you practice, you will realize. So we have to minimize. We are sleeping certain number of hours. Deny, deny. Cut down, cut down. We are eating something. Cut down on your eating. Have simple food. Minimize it. Sex pleasure minimize it. So these things have to be minimized. The first tapasya is tapasa brahmacharyana. People do not know this. That is why they are suffering even more. They will make so many videos. Itna panipina, itna kanakana idarutna idar Sonai yedeko sundeko moon Dekhu and you will be happy. But they will not tell brahmacharya. And this is the principle of Ayurveda, because he himself is not following how he can preach. But this is very important brahmacharya. It gives lot of potency immunity to your body. So tapasa brahmacharyana. So first is brahmacharya. Brahmacharya means we all understand it avoiding unnecessary sex pleasure. Sex pleasure is also coming from Krishna. Krishna tells in Bhagavad gita dharma viruddha Bhuteshu kamo asmi bhartarshabha I am the sex life, the enjoyment. But dharma viruddha, which is not contrary to religious principles of regulating human life. Sex life can be enjoyed in marriage, for producing a Krishna conscious child. So then that is all right. But without marriage, if a person enjoys that not just makes him very, very weak physically, but even mentally, there is no determination in life and what to speak of spiritually without brahmacharya, there is no question of spiritual bliss and advancement. So brahmacharya has to be followed very, very strictly. Shame. Shame means mind control. Nobody teaches mind control. As soon as you desire something, please click and the thing will be delivered on your footstep. We want immediately fulfillment of desires, immediate fulfillment. But human life is meant for regulating, controlling the mind. And there was a research in the I think it was Purdue University, and they are telling why the children in the west are suffering. We had few things which we thought I can give to my children and they would be happy. So we have given them everything. Still they are depressed now, we were not depressed in our childhood. So he tells actually, I figured out the children are suffering from the deficiency of a vitamin in the Western countries. And what is that vitamin? He told that is called vitamin N. Oh, what is vitamin N? We have not heard of it. We have a DCD, et cetera. So vitamin N means saying no denial. Our children do not know how to experience no in their lives. We thought if children are something, we should give them immediately. So they have grown up with a false perception of material reality. They think whatever I desire, it will be fulfilled immediately. Like my parents have trained me in my childhood. But when they grow up, they desire few other things which parents cannot give. And they understand no, this world is so miserable. Whatever I demanded, it was coming to me. But now, even though I'm working very hard my desires are not getting fulfilled. So they are becoming depressed children. Teenagers are becoming depressed. So he told in west we have brought children in a very wrong concept. So that is why this vitamin N deficiency is there. So we should learn how to tell no to our children. And he tells some ratio these many times I do not know what is the basis he's denying say no to our children only sometimes you should fulfill their desire. Practice them, make them understand. This is the nature of this world. Your desires will not be fulfilled. Always learn to tolerate it. So everybody is understanding this denial concept. If you take to vedas you can understand perfectly how this denial tapasya has to be practiced. So now because Brahmacharya is not being followed we have these wonderful phones, gadgets, internet and the children. The civilization is getting spoiled by baking Brahmacharya. Physical weakness, mental weakness no determination, no memory concentration and always disturbance in mind. And they are telling we should accept depression. Being depressed is not bad Aribaba it is bad. If entire civilization is depressed does not mean it is a good thing. But because people are not trained in controlling the mind they are getting depressed. So Shamayana, controlling the mind is important. Don't fulfill the vedas mentioned. Nahikashchit Kurisha Sakhyam never make friends with the mind. Your mind is suggesting something you should learn to reject. Say no. No, I will not fulfill. I will not fulfill. Postpone the desires of mind and cancel as far as possible. If it is not for your eternal benefit, shame then Dhamena dhamena means control of the senses. So control of mind is required and then you should control the senses. This is another regulation. So you have to voluntarily accept discomforts in life. And that begins with Brahmacharya. Brahmacharya is not just physically, it is there in mind also. So in mind also it has to be followed then shamena, mind control. Whatever thoughts are coming you cannot just let the mind think about it. Dhamena sense control. Tiagena tiagena means charity. So charity is also very very important for becoming happy. Coming to Satbaguna this is the way the management of the world has been designed. So God has made this world. Krishna has given some principles by which management can go nicely. Those are mentioned in the Dharma Shastras which are around 20 in number. So if you follow those rules and regulations then the whole society would be happy. So in that it is mentioned one's resources should not be used for one's own benefit. And we see that other species they are controlled by nature. Naturally they cannot enjoy all the resources that they produce. The bull will work so hard in the field but he will not enjoy all the grains that are produced there. He will come back, eat some dry grass that's it. Cow will take some dry grass, produce so much of. Milk. But cow will not enjoy the milk which it is producing. That humans will enjoy the plants which are producing the trees which are producing fruits they don't enjoy their fruits and woods, we enjoy that. So other species, lower species, they are controlled, protected by material nature that they don't break this principle of regulation. They have regulated life. At this time the animals they will have sex pleasure at this time they will do this thing. At this time they would sleep hibernate plants at this time they will produce buds and flowers and fruits. But human being has been given freedom. The freedom is to further regulate your life and engage yourself in the service of God. But we used to have more animalistic propensities become more irregulated in our life. So Tiagena we should not enjoy whatever we are producing. Thus this charity was very very important. This charity also purifies us. It is one of the regulation. Then after Tiaga satya satya means you should be very very truthful. Always truth should be spoken. If you don't speak truth, mind will be very very disturbed. This science people do not know. That is why people are very disturbed. Because they are speaking lies left and right. So if you speak lies like that, immediately disturbance comes in the mind. So Satyam is very very important. Shacha Bhyam shachami Shuchi cleanliness there are principles to keep the body internally and externally clean. Externally it should be kept clean by taking bath twice or thrice a day in cold water. And internally it can be purified by chanting the holy names of Krishna. And by proper evacuation internal cleanliness can be maintained. So in this way internal external cleanliness is also important. That is called do few things. Four regulative principles do not break nyamaina chanting the holy names of Krishna every day. So these are positive rules and regulations. Take only Krishna Prasadam. So in this way so many rules and regulations a person has to follow to become happy. Oh my God. Prabhu I cannot follow better. I was not hearing all these things. I was happy in ignorance. What are we speaking discussing? So it is very difficult. But this is the general process which people have to follow. And in Kalyuga it is very very difficult for us. If you tell somebody, you have to be always stressful. Tomorrow onwards you'll tell are you madman? Can we do it? So a simple process is recommended by Acharyas for Kaliyuga and what is that process? So there is a beautiful shloka all these tapasya all these regulations are meant for purifying ourselves. Rishabh Dev told tapo divyam putraka yena Shuddhyat satvam Shuddhayat we have to get free from the lower energies. Lust and greed should be washed away from the heart. And person should come under influence of pure energy, pure goodness satvaguna. So this Satvic promotion to Sattvic energy is executed by following this what we discussed tapasa brahmacharyana shamainaniyamaynava tiagena satya Shaucha Abhyam yameen Yamenava but there is one process which is very, very, very many fold more powerful than following all these rules and regulations. And what is that process? So it is told in the Vedas natatahi aghavan Rajan puyeta tapa adhivi yata Krishna pita pranas tat purushanishevaya natatahi aghavan Rajan so opposite of Bhagavan is Aghwan. Agawan means most sinful person who is breaking all the rules and regulations. So such a person will suffer like anything, like a hardcore criminal, he will be punished by laws of nature. So he needs purification. So he has to execute all these processes. But Natatahiya ghawan Rajan again Shukdhya Goswami is explaining to the King parikshit purification which begins with tapasya. None of these processes which we have discussed, which begin with tapasya, they purify a person as this process. What is the process? Yata Krishna arpita pranas tatpurushanishevaya yata Krishna arpita pranaha a person who has offered his life unto the lotus feet of Krishna, a pure devotee of Krishna. Tad purusha nishevaya engaging in the service of such a pure devotee, nothing purifies like that. So this simple process is recommended for the people of Kalyuga. So once a disciple asked Srila Prabhupada that Srila Prabhupada it is told in the Vedas Namgrananti a person who is always chanting the Hare Krishna mantra he has to take bath in all the places of pilgrimage. He has to finish all the study of the scriptures. He has to execute all kinds of tapasya and austerities. He has to give up all his wealth in charity. And then, after such elaborate study of scriptures, after taking bath in all the holy places of pilgrimage, offering everything in charity and life after life, a person is purified by all these rules and regulations. Brahma no Churanti he becomes qualified to chant your Holy Names. So have we done all these activities Prabhupada in previous life? Prabhupada told no, you were rotting in a very downtrodden situation, but I created this piety in you. So this regular process is very, very tough. And by such purification, a person comes to the process of chanting the Holy Names of Krishna, but simply touch of pure devotee. Following the instructions of pure devotee creates so much purity that a person is able to follow this highest dharma, highest regulation and engage in the service of Krishna. Tanam grahanadibi this highest religion. It begins with chanting of the Holy Names. So person is able to do this simply by engaging in service of pure devotee. And there are examples. Examples are there in the Vedic history. Like Merigari. Like Jagai Madhai. And examples are there in the modern history like Prabhupada West and transformed all the hippies and all of us. We were not following any of the rules and regulations. It is not possible to even chant one name of Krishna. But how such piety is created. So this proved the veracity of this statement of Bhagavatam natata yagavan Rajan puyatatapa Adidi, Yata Krishna arpita pranas a person whose life is offered to Krishna pure devotee. If we follow his direction then that is the most purifying element of this world. So this is the best way of regulating one's lifestyle. Finding a pure devotee of Krishna whose life is offered to Krishna and then engaging in his service, following his directions. So in nectar of instruction, Prabhupada elaborates this point. All of you should read this book Nectar of Instruction. Those who do not have kindly post in the chat box. We will share the link with you. You can order online for you or you can collect from our centers physically. So what we are discussing this is very nicely explained in The Nectar of Instruction. So Prabhupada is telling this simple process is being recommended now in this age. So what do pure devotees of Krishna recommend now in this age? Very simple. Chant and hear the Holy Names of Lord as much as possible constantly throughout the day. Keep on chanting it's very simple process. There is no harm. You are working, you are traveling. Keep on chanting. Hare Krishna Mahamantra and few times, few rounds on beads you sit and chant with great attention hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna Hari Hare, Hare Ram Hare Ram, Ram, Ram Hari Hare ITI, shodhakanam nam Kali kalmashan ashnam. Just these 16 words we chant and we'll be free from all the debilitating effects of the Kaliyoga. And follow four regulative principles and execute whatever pure devotee, spiritual master is giving instructions to us. That's it. If we follow this thing chanting 16 rounds, follow four regulative principles and engage in service of Krishna as per the direction of Spiritual Master pure devotee then all these tough processes which we are fearful to hear of will be taken care. We'll get strength and all these so called tough processes will come automatically to us on its own without extraneous endeavor we will develop so much of spiritual pleasure. So please realize the world does not realize this. We have to understand. Tapasya regulation is very very important now. It does not mean tomorrow we get some news. Followers of Hare Krishna movement fainted they stop deeding don't do that. We have to minimize. How? We have to minimize that also. Krishna explains in Bhagavad gita yuktahar viharasi yukta cheshta SEPTA sapnava bolasiya yoga bhavati dukkah, the denial should be to the extent of maintaining body and soul together. If you have reduced so much of your eating that you are feeling very weak, mind and senses have become weak, you will get diseased. So that much denial is not there. But eating should be there. To keep the body fit. We should eat to live. We should not live to eat. So that much minimization should be done so that body is fit. Keeping the body fit is important. Similarly, sex life it is not possible to control completely for everyone so grahast Astram is there. Do it in marriage for producing good children. That is called regulation. Without it also a person may fall disease if he is not trained properly. So similarly sleeping if tomorrow onwards I want to follow the sanyasis goswamis I will sleep for 2 hours or 1 hour. Then again we may fall sick. So sleep should be taken so that a person is feeling fresh. You sleep more, you become very lazy. So normally in our state six to 7 hours of sleep is sufficient at night not in the daytime. Daytime maximum an hour we should take list. So in this way we should regulate our sleep six to 7 hours as of now. And when we advance in spiritual life slowly it we should the objective of life should be to minimize these things. But these things will be minimized only in proportion to our spiritual advancement. So engage positively in the service of Krishna under the direction of Saj Guru Tatpurushanishevaya. And then when we advance when we are the more we are situated on spiritual platform material necessities demand will automatically reduce. So follow the instructions of pure devotee of chanting and following four regulative principles no meat eating intoxication gambling and illicit sex. And engage yourself in service of Krishna strictly as per his directions. And try to minimize do tapasya keeping the body and soul fit to be together and with the same of life. Having a simple living develop high thinking, understanding I am not the body. Why to put this butter in fire and increase this unnecessary agitation? What is the need of following this path? Where even the most successful people are facing depression? This wonderful simple lifestyle where there is no loss of fitness, health, money or family. We are not any leave family. Go to jungle like Vishwamitra no. Wherever you are situated simply keep on hearing about Krishna, Krishna's name, Krishna's signs and regulate yourself as per the directions of pure devotee. Wherever you are situated, whatever job you are doing, whichever people you are having around you, whichever country you are living in in any situation there is no need of changing the situation. Simply follow this process and our consciousness will change. And we will feel it depends upon our endeavor, the bliss of spiritual life and the most important regulation. Don't forget, always keep on chanting. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna krishna. Hare hare hare Ram. Hare Ram. Ram Ram hare Hare all the regulations begin with this. Simply if you bring Krishna to our life Krishna will take care of everything. So Krishna has incarnated in the form of Holy Name. Please bring Holy Name into your life by always chanting Him, always serving Him by chanting his name. And then all these things will be revealed. Will you be given strength to follow very very easily. So with this we will end today's session. But the session is not over yet because we have a very wonderful kirtan for you now. So please enjoy this kirtan. Try to hear very very attentively. This is called regulating the ears. Ears want to hear so much of sound but control the ear to hear of Krishna we cannot hear always at least now this kirtan which we are playing try to hear very very attentively. And then control your tongue by repeating the same sound. So hear first of all and then repeat the same sound. It's there of around twelve minutes. Ten to twelve minutes. So please try to participate remaining absorbed in these holy names. And after that I will be there to take up questions if anybody has. So thank you so much. We will be back with the question answer session after this kirtan. Hari Krishna hari Krishna krishna hare Hari hari Rama har it ram listen. Hari. Ram. Hari. Ram. Ram. Hari. Everyone, please. Hari Krishna krishna Har mashna krishna it hide it. Krishna Krishna, Krishna hide it. Hide it. Rama hide it. Ram rama Rama hide behind it. Rama harm. Hare hare hare Krishna. Hari Krishna. Krishna Krishna, hare Hare Rama. Hare Ram Rama har Ram Ram. Hari Krishna Krishna, Krishna Krishna, homi Krishna. Honey Krishna Krishna Krishna hari Ram Ram. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna Krishna, hare Nam. What? I'm harikrishna harika snape Ramalo which is what a man. Oh. How did Joseph olive it's not it's my heart. I'm ram Ram krishna Krishna hare Hare Hare Ram you Hare Hare Hare Rama. Hare Ram Ram Ram krishna krishna Krishna Rama. Hare Ram Ram Ram krishna Krishna, Krishna Ram. Holy Krishna Krishna it. I want it up. What? I want it. What it all so we can start taking questions. I request you to post in the chat. Okay. There is first question already. This is from Bhuvana alias Radhakrishna Ayer. Question is after completion of chanting 16 round immediately get lot of disturbance in the mind. That means past event of life remembrance. Weaving in the mind so much struggle. Maybe too much struggle to control weaving mind could not do next process of prayering. Bhagwan, this incident will arising for few days ago. I am try to stop. Guide me. Okay. So you are chanting 16 rounds. It appears from here. And even after that the mind is giving so much of trouble, so much, so many things. And you are expressing the apprehension that maybe you are trying so much to control. And this is causing trouble. Yes. So the understanding is holy name of Lord is very very sweet and very very powerful. But we have to chant it attentively so the struggle will be there. So don't focus on what unnecessary thoughts the mind is putting in. Just focus on the holy name. Prabhupada. So still mind is very powerful. It will keep on putting such voices in our brain. But keep on chanting and hearing attentively. Hare Krishna hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hari hare Hare Ram hare Ram ram Ram hari. Hari. Still mind is disturbing. Prabhupada chant loudly. If you're chanting with many people, of course you can go separately but then chant loudly. If you chant loudly Prabhupada then mind will come under control. So ordinarily Japamis yes, we should be able to hear. That is sufficient. But if there is disturbance in the mind, chant loudly and that will solve the problem. But please have faith. It may take some practice but this chanting only is the solution. So please continue with it. And if you stick onto chanting slowly, mind will become absorbed in the Holy Name. Just we have to practice it. Next question is from Anushka Shanbhag. How to voluntarily deny these material comforts of life? If we try to, it will last a few days but doesn't last long. Nor do we have such an environment where we can practice it. What should be done? A very nice question. So first thing. First question which is asked is it doesn't last long and second thing is the answer to that. Because we don't have proper environment. If you're not living in proper environment, it won't last long. That is why we have to live in the association of devotees. This is the second step of devotional life. Spiritual life. Living with devotees is unavoidable. So we can create some devotees around us. It is not very difficult process. Morning and evening in your place, this kirtan is there. If you can sing, it is very nicely, you can sing. Invite some neighbors, some friends, somebody and you can tell them also to sing with you and you will relish. Some people may not agree but if we are sincere, Krishna will send some sincere devotee who is willing to follow. And then in association even one person comes with you. That is very nice. That is good association. Sit with them and chant and hear the names of Krishna and open Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam. Read and discuss whatever you are doing there. In this way you can create devotees around you. So if possible, live around a Hare Krishna temple. Visit as much as possible and wherever you are living, try to preach morning and evening. You do kirtan and reading and discussion of Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam and invite somebody in this process to do it with you. By the simple process you'll be always having company of devotees. And then if you are down, you can pull them up. If you are down, they will pull you up. If they are down, you can pull them in. This way in association, everyone advances. So practicing devotional life in association is very important. So please have proper environment. By shifting to a place where there are many devotees, there are temple or if you cannot afford, you cannot shift near a temple. Then create devotees around you. By this preaching morning and evening, it is very simple, just endeavor, it will be successful. And when we chant this Hare Krishna Mahamantra agreed in association of devotees, automatically we get strength to follow. All these things have to be followed, but direct struggle endeavor is not there to follow these things. Struggle to follow the instructions of pure devotee. How? He's telling me to engage in the service of Krishna and as per his direction chant regulate your life and then you will have strength to follow all these things. So what you have to do is morning and evening follow this process of chanting and reading and invite some people to do it with you. In this way, in proper environment, you'll be able to continue these things. Next question is by Ashish Tere. For external purity, why do we need to bathe with cold water? So this bathing not just purifies externally yes, it purifies externally, but bathing purifies the mind also. And this is the specific nature of the water. And cold water has got more purification. This is the science. So just like why do we use the sanitizer it purifies similarly it is a property of water to purify us. And you can also realize, isn't it? When we take bath with cold water, immediately we feel fresh and rejuvenated. Next question is by Chakradhar Kaveri. Hare Krishna. Prabhu hare Krishna. Thank you. Most welcome. I live in Amsterdam and my wife son eat meat. Okay. I'm missing Prasadam and stopped offering food to Krishna. As the utensils are not pure, I'm missing Bangalore temple. I listen to your jiggyasa sessions every day on spotify and get energized. But it is making me stressed that I am unable to have association and prasadam. I am chanting without fail. Please help. So this is very nice. This is the most wonderful stress that we can take that I am not getting devotee association. So please pray to Krishna and become anxious for it. And try to serve Krishna nicely. So this process of kirtanam can never be stopped. Krishna's service is apratihata pranayar arthair dhiya vaacha we can offer our life to Krishna. Engage our energy in Krishna's service. If that is not possible arthair we can use our resources money in the service of Krishna. If that is also not possible, then dhiya we have our intelligence. We use our intelligence to promote Krishna consciousness. These books and this knowledge. If that also cannot be done, I'm not very intelligent. VA, simply tell people, give them a mantra card. Please chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra you'll be benefited and in this way and chant the holy names of Krishna. So in this way VA tongue can be used. So in either of these four ways or all of these four ways as far as as much as possible in your situation, please do it and then Krishna will arrange. Devotees, everything is under control of Krishna. He wants to test our sincerity. So please engage in service of Krishna as far as possible with Pranaya Arthur Dhyavacha and beg for Krishna's mercy. Krishna will definitely arrange. And you have told you are not able to offer because meat is cooked. Definitely you cannot offer in that case. But you can do few things like even though the cooked food is meat, uncooked food can be offered to Krishna. Keep some vessels for Krishna separately. Fruits can be offered, water can be offered, milk can be offered. So such arraignment can be done. So please try to do it. At least some prasadam is there. You are getting every day. Next question is by Rajesh. What if in a family life spouse disagrees for shuchi etc in kitchen? Yes. So we have to be practical. We have to train the spouse. That is why association of devotees is very much required. So let your spouse bring your spouse in the association of devotees. Now there are so much opportunities. So many are there for online association also. So online offline train them and by this training gradually we should not try to become perfectionist immediately or take some extreme steps. We have to little be compassionate. Understand the other person is not fortunate. Rather than becoming angry, we should be compassionate that mercy has not fallen on this soul of Krishna so slowly in a very loving way, in a very caring way we should encourage. Next question is by Akansha Ray prabhu, can I chant without beads? Yes, chanting should be done 24 hours. Prabhupata's Krishna consciousness movement is based on the principle of chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra at every moment. Satam kirtayanto mam bhaktis dhan maraj was asked so should we chant the Holy Name? Always. So bhaktis Dhanmaraj told this injunction of Bhagavad Gita given by Lord Krishna in the 9th chapter verse number 14 Satam Kirtayantum leaves no scope for speculation. Krishna has told Satam so you have to chant always. So we have to chant always 24 hours. Whenever our tongue is free. Whatever activities we are doing this practice we have to develop. But minimum in order to make your spiritual life perfect 16 rounds on beads are very important. And if you are not able to chant 16 you can even chant with whatever is convenient to you as per your situation at this time. So try to chant those many times on the beads and increase it to 16 minimum and over and above that once your 16 rounds are done, then you continue chanting. You can continue chanting on beads if it is possible. Otherwise you are traveling, you are working just use your tongue but try to come to the platform of chanting 16 rounds of beads. It is very very important because Yata Krishta Purushanishevaya as per the directions we have to follow devotional service direction is to chant on beads. Next question is by Sujai Goswami. We are under the three modes of material nature always and we have limited free will. Do we really have free will? Good question. We are under the three modes of nature, that is a fact. But if there is no free will given to us then there won't be any papa or punya for the living entity in human form. Of life. Yes. Free will is less if you have got a man's body. Attraction to woman is natural. You cannot tell. I'll get attracted. Of course, that is also happening now. Unfortunately, civilization is very simple. But normally if you have got a man's body attraction for woman, woman for man's body you have got pig's. Body attraction is for eating stool. You have got a crow's. Body attraction is for eating filthy things. You have got cow. Body attraction is for eating grass. Other body attraction for eating fruits. So we are forced to follow few things. But still we in human form of life. It is a loophole. Here we have got little freedom. And the more you follow the regulations the more you regulate your lifestyle, the more the freedom increases. So definitely we have free will. And the more we are in satvaguna, the more our free will freedom increases. And human life is meant to increase this freedom and completely come out of the clutches of laws of nature. So yes, we have this free will and the more we chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra engage in service of pure devotee the more we will experience this increased freedom in our life. Next question is by Chandrakan Chaudhary. We regularly perform Deep Puja by singing Guru Vandana first followed by Damodar Ashtakam with the same lamp. Do we need different lamps for Guru Vandana and Damodar Ashtakam? You are first followed by Damodar Ashtakam with the same lamp. You are doing Guru Vandana. Yes. You should have different thing. A different lamp for Krishna and different lamp for spiritual master Prabhuji. Next question is by Ahari B rabuji. I'm very much inspired by Iscon disciples. I too want to become a scorn disciple. Can I become? Yes, you can become disciple. It's very easy. Wherever you are situated, you can do it. Some people become disciple full time like us missionaries. But majority follows from outside. So if you are agreeing to follow the basic instructions of Prabhupada you can very easily become disciple. It's not tough. So it's very good inclination that you have. Please try to pursue it. Next question is by Smita Patel. If we chant in mind, is it okay? Yes, it is okay. But not the best for our platform. So on our platform we have to loudly chant and suppose in some situation loud chanting is not possible. You are so sick. Your throat is choked by a cough. That sound is not coming out. Then what can be done? Some extreme situation may happen. Some paralysis, mouth paralysis something is there. Then mind chanting also is good. Or you are sitting somewhere very if you chant you are sitting in a class or any place the neighbor may get disturbed. You are sitting next to somebody. But in mind chanting should go on. So yes, this is just like you would have experienced when you hear some new song. Or like that it happens. It enters the mind you're trying to do some activity but the song is getting played. This training has to happen with Hare Krishna mantra also in mind. It should always go but as far as possible we should bring it out on tongue. So what happens when you chant verbally automatically? Srila Prabhupada explains just like we are sitting now and there is some sound of vehicle passing by automatically attention will go over there. So in a similar fashion mind will be forced to concentrate if you produce this vibration on your tongue and apart from that your tongue sense is also getting purified. If Krishna's name is coming onto it and apart from this all the living entities around you if they are touched by this vibration, they also are getting purified. So thus verbally chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra there are no limit to its glories. So in mind it should happen always and verbally as far as possible and to what extent. Prabhupada told verbally we should practice that even when we are honoring Prasadam, if in between there is no food on the tongue, your tongue should be vibrating. Hare Krishna Mahamantra. So this is the extent to which Prabhupada recommends to chant always. You go for washroom there also you chant Hare Krishna mantra. Of course don't carry your bead inside. So like this we have to practice. Next question is by Kushagh Kumar hare Krishna can I chant on counter app on my mobile? I can't find beads around my house. So the website is there. Krishna store and many other places are there. You can order and it can be couriered to you. So it is very very easy. These things on Amazon it will be available many other places. Just order bead in next couple of days it will reach you. So counter is not much recommended against beads. When suppose there is no beads at all not possible in current situation you can use counter but please get the beads in one or two days by ordering online. Next question is by Bharat Shivlani hare Krishna Prabhuji when I chant in the mornings I feel sleepy. Please suggest so it can be due to various reasons. Sometimes if we have not taken sufficient rest then we'll feel sleepy. If night meal is too heavy, it has not got digested properly, we'll feel sleepy. Some blood pressure issues are there. We can feel sleepy. And if you're chanting Hare Krishna mantra for a long time many many rounds continuously mind naturally becomes peaceful. So this is an impediment. So this by practice at an advanced level it is possible to control sleep altogether. So meanwhile it is natural. It happens with many devotees many times. In either of these cases not sufficient rest or stomach is heavy or tiredness and other things. But by practice, consistent practice take care of these things. Take sufficient rest, take bath in the morning, remain fresh, try to hear attentively and if you are feeling sleepy, you can wash. Face you can walk also. You can stand but try to hear somehow with great attention you can stand, you can walk also slowly and hear but try to hear attentively so the sleep will go away when we develop taste in chanting Hare Krishna mantra. Next question is by Mahindra Singh Prabhuji. Can I chant without chanting? Bag. What is the use of chanting bag? So chanting beads we discussed are important now the beads are pure and sacred. It should not touch ground or should not touch any dirty place. So for the protection of the chanting beads they remain pure we keep them in the bag. Thus bag is important and another injunction is also there in nectar of devotion. When we are chanting without beads then the benefit of that chanting may be taken by some other souls so that is a bead should be hidden inside the bag not exposed while chanting. This is another injunction. So for these reasons chanting Bag is recommended. This question is by Lahari B Prabhuji. I am a student at IIT BHU and I'm inspired by Iscon disciples I too want to become full time Skon disciple. Can I become? Yes, you can become full time also we need people like you from IIT and you have accomplished something materially very good and if you speak naturally there would be more attention given. So because materialists they get attracted on material platform from material accomplishments so it is the best use of your IIT degree so you are most welcome. Please do it. So if you want further but there are a few qualifications that are also required. We have to see whether you can continue very easily this life or not. So please keep in touch with us and maybe you can share your email ID or contact details and some of our devotees will come in touch with you and you can please take consultancy and decide your future. Next question is by Anusha V can you please give me ideas on how to wake up on regular timing which affects Bhakti to be done for following day? Yes. So just like we keep alarm for getting up early in the morning, so some devotees do practice it, you can keep alarm for sleeping. Also, you have to be very, very firm, very, very determined. Then it is possible because the material nature is designed in such a way that the living entity always remains in illusion. So it will not allow for us to sleep on time. When you don't sleep on time, you cannot get up on time. So be very determined to sleep early. And then night meal should be light should be taken when you are going to rest. Your stomach should be the meal should have been digested. So take at least 1 hour before you go to sleep. And when the food is properly digested, it is light. You are sleeping early then getting up early would be easy. So first thing is have a light night meal. It is digested when you are going to sleep, have sufficient rest at night and when you get up in the morning take bath. And the most important is association of devotees. Without association your determination may not continue for a long time. So create some association and in group just like why people have various clubs cycling there is a group they want to cycle because they know alone. If I decide for one or two days I can do it. But then I may not be able to continue for a long time. So that is why have association of people. Please understand, it is very important. Just if you can have association your life is successful. It is like a boat or a train. You have boarded a train for Delhi. Just keep sitting there. Now you want to sit there, you want to sleep there, you want to eat or you want to whatever do automatically. As you have boarded a train bound to Delhi, you have reached Delhi automatically. Just don't jump out of train. That is devotee association. So that is why your life should be designed in such a way. Find where devotees are living and live with them. Live close to them and do this sadhana in the association of devotees, please do not neglect this first step. Without following this first step, Prabhupada tells without if somebody is willing to live aloof from this society of Krishna consciousness and yet thinking of spiritual advancement he is living in great hallucination. For this is not possible. Spiritual life can be relished and fully matured only in the association of devotees. So does not matter, you get little less money, does not matter, you get little less comforts. Find out where devotees are there and try to live with them and engage in Sadhana bhakti in their association. So for getting up early in the morning also the most powerful important factor is association and chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra. And then have determination of having light meals, sleeping early. By these few things you will be able to advance and get up early in the morning. Next question is by Raghava Maheshwari. Nice to see you Raghav. Here also Hare Krishna Prabhu how to fastly advance in KC and go back to Godhead in this life only. So first of all we have to try to chant offenselessly Hare Krishna Mahanantra. This is what Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has recommended. Hari, ranam AVAKA vilam we should focus. We should try very hard to become offenseless enchanting and how a person can become offenseless enchanting. So for this yes you have to be very very attentive. You have to follow four regulative principles and you have to preach very very nicely. So chant offenselessly Hare Krishna Mahamantra and preach very very vigorously. So the more enthusiastically we engage ourselves in this process, the way for going back to Godhead will be made very very quick and short. Next question is by Akanshari rabhu krishna K devotee or social life? Co aksat raksakteh krishna K devotee yes. Krishna K devotion co acha krishna K devotee kobi sathmiraknai or social circle? Bisatmiraknai agarap Ye puchra yafir apushna Chate Krishna devotion sathmirakna or social circle? So social circle? Rakna Bhazari man is a social animal material Thinkers v. Volta Samashte Lake in Yejo social Life haye Devotees agarham as a Social Circle merea Joki materialist Sebanahua then Shastra Kete it is better to burn yourself in a cage which is set with fire than living in the association of materialist. Because so much suffering we have gone through in various species of life. Now human form make chance miller if you lose this Toham finish hojayangi to Isilia somehow or other just like parents bolte Bachos Kesat Madhguma Denver they tell please have proper association. Similarly this association is most important factor. So it is not that devotees wonderfully. Now by Prabhupada's mercy we have so many devotees in so many places across the world. So find and develop such social circle is very important. We have to avoid social circle gradually. Yes we can be on good terms with them. We can go. Mix as far as preaching Krishna consciousness there. But mixing intimately discussing Krishna Katha enjoying their association no, for preaching we can go. There is some opportunity to go in a party. If in party they will force you to take unoffed food to Krishna other things and non veg and so on do not go. But if going in their party will help you have contacts for preaching Krishna consciousness please go there. You may not eat anything or do like this thing. But you can associate and preach. So in this way we can have our social circle with devotees. Very important. This question is by Bharat Shivlani Hare Krishna prabhuji, I am chanting for more than five years but I still have no taste for chanting. Please help. So as I just told Prabhupada tells maybe you are not having devotee association. Because without devotee association Krishna consciousness cannot be relishable. Very new devotees also in few days sometimes they are able to get their relish of chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra and sometimes it may not be possible either we are breaking regulative principles. Then again material pores becomes very strong. We get covered by Rajasthamas we may not be able to relish. So either breaking regulative principles or not having devotee association or not doing seva so we have to sweat it out for Krishna. This is called bhakti yoga. You need not stand on 1ft in jungle for many many years. You need not eat some bare minimum grass and leaves and all such things. No Bhakti yoga means working very hard for the pleasure of Krishna. So when we do seva then taste for sadhana is automatically awakened. So thus it is told in Bhagavatam also if you want to have taste for this Krishna Katha so chanting Hare Krishna while hearing Bhagavatam. So I will do it. And if I am doing it I will advance very fast. But the catch is I am not getting this taste. So somehow if I can get taste then it is so nice. Spiritual life is blissful. So how to develop this taste? So there is this wonderful shloka. What is that? Vasudeva Katharuchi SIAT Mahasevaya Vipra Vasudev Katharuchi the taste is awakened by SIAT means it becomes possible Mahat sevaya by engaging in the service of pure devotee. So please engage yourself. Take out some time. Weekdays you are busy weekend. Saturday, Sunday just like people go here in Mumbai, they go to Mahabaleshwar, they go to Goa, they go to Pune or what is that khandala and all these things. So Saturday, Sunday you can completely come and stay in the temple around temple and completely do very nice eva temple cleaning, book distribution, preaching like this you can do it. So at least one day in a week we can take out with family. Engage yourself in the service of Krishna. All of you do book distribution chant entire day very very nicely. Do preaching. So at least one or two days on weekends we can use prana in the service of Krishna artha please don't save so much of money. Don't hanker to increase the material comforts. It is like putting butter in fire. Use your money in the service of Krishna Dhiya. Use intelligence how I can connect more people to Krishna consciousness. VA tell others to chant to hear. So in this way engage yourself in the service of pure devotee. And then taste will come automatically very soon. Immediately. And if seva is not happening then even for many many years very difficult to develop taste. So please try to be in association of devotees. Try to follow regulative principles and do seva then the taste would be definitely awakened. Next question is by Bajrang Singh Rajpuruhit Hare Krishna prabhuji can we think of Dham VAS for children's Guru Kulam and some spiritual advancement. If we do some bhattik office work from home or daily income earning, is that okay? Or we should only do sadhana in Dham. So Dham is meant for the renuncians and Srila Prabhupada has given even a very advanced understanding. So Prabhupada told that people are going to live in Dham. But Prabhupada, he left dham for the service of dham. So even if you are living Dham but such family attachments everything is there. So Dham is meant for those people who don't want to continue with family. Completely want to dedicate yourself in Krishna's service. So then Dham should be we should live. But if we are having material attachments and we engage in any material affairs in Dhamma that is a very great severe offense. So unless a person is very he is going for renunciation he should avoid living in Dhamma. So Prabhupada, go for three days and then come back. Then you will develop familiarity. But the process, which is very, very purifying, is engaging in preaching work. So children and anybody, they can also be brought to devotee association wherever devotees are living. And rather than yes for retirement, we can plan living in Dhamma. But when we are not retired, we penetrate the densest of the cities where we can get many, many people and thus spread this knowledge of Krishna consciousness. So, Krishna is very, very eager to spread this knowledge. Entire advancement of spiritual life depends upon mercy of Guru and Krishna. And for what Guru and Krishna are eager. Krishna tells Nachatasmat manushes, nobody is dearer to me than the person who preaches my glories to others. So, if we actually want to advance in spiritual life, please plan, how can I preach using my job, my business? So, no need of leaving the job, no need of leaving the business. Use your position in your office, in your business, your position in your society to spread to others this knowledge. So, plan your life, your children's life, in such a way that you can engage they can engage in preaching work, keep them in devotee association. That is the most recommended way. Penetrate the densest of the cities to preach Krishna consciousness. And then for retirement, yes, then we can plan living in Dham. So, thank you so much for all your wonderful questions. I request all of you to note down some points. And if we hear and forget, then.