Hare Krishna. A very warm welcome to all of you. After Maharaj Yudhishthir did great sacrifice called Rajasuya Yajna he became famous not just on this planet but across other heavenly planets as well. And thus Duryodha one became envious how come he has become so famous? And meanwhile they had got a very nice palace constructed by Maya Demon the architect of the demons of the lower planetary systems. Just like Vishwakarma is there he builds it for the heavenly planets maya Demon does it for the lower planets and circumstantially it. So happened Maya Demon was living in a forest and Arjuna saved him by being burned down in the forest fire. So he became very pleased. So thus he made this very unique palace. So the demons are very very expert in conjuring many tricks creating illusions. So in this palace there was such an arrangement that unless a person knows the internal architecture he would misinterpret land for water and vice versa. So Duryodhan once he desired to see Yodhishthir Maharaj and he entered the palace. He was anyway very envious and angry. And the doorkeeper there was some misunderstanding with them. He somehow entered in anger. Sword was there in his hand and when he entered he wanted to cross the place. So he mistook land as water. And then in this way he fell in the water and all the ladies now the Pandavas were there, Draupadi was there and Krishna also was staying at that time. And all the thousands of queens of Krishna were also there in the palace. All of them started laughing loudly at this instance of Duryodhana so Yudhishthir Maharaj wanted to stop please don't do that but Krishna encouraged them. Yes, please laugh he wanted to encourage krishna had an elaborate plan and this was the beginning of the enmity between the two brothers of same family. The pandavas also are actually kauravas. They belong to the Kuru dynasty. But nevertheless because of this faction we call them Pandavas and Kauravas. So Krishna had this plan to annihilate all the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. And thus Krishna encouraged okay please laugh, let him get offended so that he does all these steps which he later took and eventually that led to destruction of entire Kaurav dynasty. So just like an ordinary person of this universe can conjure such tricks that land can be taken as water. Where you are perceiving land, it is water and we are perceiving water it is actually land. In a similar fashion maya, the external potency of Krishna it plays such amazing tricks on small conditioned souls like us that we mistake happiness as distress distress as happiness, spiritual as material and something material is taken as spiritual. So that is why it is told one should never rely upon his senses. One's senses cannot lead one to perfect knowledge using one's senses one is thinking oh, this is land. Just like so these stories are very very powerful. So just like Duryodhana was thinking oh, here is land, let me step carefully onto it, let me avoid water. But actually that was water. The perception was created that there is land, there is no water over there and he fell in. In a similar fashion Maya creates some allurements and people think oh, this is my happiness and happiness is perceived as distress. So now we are going to have very nice festival of Nasimha Chaturdashi. So it is very very important that we celebrate these festivals very nicely. And how do we celebrate the festival? It is very simple. We save the time from all other activities. Even from eating, cooking, eating all this consumes a lot of time and then after eating you become lethargic you feel sleepy. So we avoid eating also we save all the time and entire time. Why do we save it for to engage ourselves in the service of God. So actually a sincere devotee for him every day is a festival. His life is nothing but service of God. But usually living entities are not interested to serve the Lord because serving the Lord is distress. Who does it? What happens? And those of you who have started recently chanting and if you have picked up good number of rounds, four rounds, eight rounds or 16 rounds people would tell you 2 hours you are chanting, why you are wasting time, do something worthwhile in this time they think oh this is and I cannot do it. Oh, it is very difficult, they find it difficult, they find it burdensome. So this is the way how the material world is created. So nevertheless people want to enjoy here. So through these festivals, through enjoyment the training is given to living entities so that they can eventually develop attraction and understanding of God. So please do not miss to celebrate these festivals, save time, do fasting and along with fasting don't forget the main activity. Sometimes people just fast and think festival is a success. No, we fast so that we can come out of bodily concept of life. When we do austerity voluntarily we take discomforts in our life. The austerity begins with getting up early in the morning. People like to sleep a lot and snows the clock unlimited times. That is very very pleasant. But getting up early in the morning before the day breaks is not pleasant. However that is required. That is tapasya. And then taking cold water bath is another tapasya. Two times, three times bath a day is tapasya. And like this so many other things are there which a person is supposed to undergo so that he can understand that he is not the body. So when we do this tapasya we are able to realize oh, this is land and this is water, this is spirit and this is matter. And along with that when we do tapasya then we engage ourselves in the service of God. And the service begins with chanting and hearing. So as much as possible. Please try to chant. Try to hear the pastimes connected with Lord nursing Dev. The teachings, the life, the activities of Prahlad Maharaj. So Prahalad Maharaj when he was asked by Lord nursing Dev so he was very greatly harassed by his atheistic father Hiranikashupu. So finally Lord Narasing Dev appeared out of great compassion to save his devotee from this harassment and to kill the demon. Demon was killed and then nursing Dev asked Prahlad Maharaj so you have suffered so much. Please let me know how can I help you? So Prahlad Maharaj so apparently we can see that Prahlad Maharaj suffered so much. Prahlad Maharaj was attempted to be killed so many times by his father. He was put under the foot of the elephant. He was thrown from the mountain cliff and boiling oil and snowfall he was subjected to and so many other miseries poison. Mother was forced to administer poison to the child. But he survived and Hiran Kashapu was surprised what is the source of your power? I have done so much of Tapasya to get these powers and I am not able to defeat you kill you. So he was facing great harassment and finally Lord Nar Singhya told please ask me what do you want in life? So Prahlad Maharasht tells my dear Lord, I do not have any problem in my life. Naivod Dujay paraduratyaya vaitaranyat so do you want liberation? No, I'm not at all afraid by Vaitaranya Naivo Dujay paraduratya vaitaranyatvir gayana Mahamrita magna chatta I am not at all afraid by any of the difficulties of this material world. Nobody could have faced severe tortures and difficulties like Prahlad Maharaj. But Prahlad Maharaj was so much advanced in his spiritual life. That is very extraordinary state of spiritual life that even the boiling oil was not able to affect his body. So very exalted personalities are able to display very exalted. Pure devotees are displaying such features as was displayed by Prahlad Maharaj, Haridas Thakur Bhishma and other such devotees. So he was so much absorbed. So this is a stage of spiritual life when a person is so much absorbed that he is not at all affected by any of the laws of nature. Hot, cold, this thing doesn't affect him at all. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling I am not at all having any difficulty. Why I'm not having difficulty? He reveals the secret just like now some people may be very happy who have got vaccine. So it is not easy to make vaccine. You need to have lot of intelligence how to make it and then probably you will not be affected by the disease. And there are great many patents about various such medicines. So what is that thing which Prahlad Maharaj has got? Hirandakashiku was also very amazed that what is this special power you have got? I'm throwing you from mountain nothing is happening. The elephant is trying to trample you. Nothing is happening. Poison I give it to you, nothing happens to you. What is that thing you have got? What is this power? So here Prahlad Maharaj is revealing what is my power. Why I am not at all disturbed by all these calamities. He's telling consciousness is absorbed in Vire gayan enchanting your glories. So this is a very confidential science. Mana bhaw madh bhakto madhyaji mam namaskaru satam kirtayanto maam krishna tells in nine chapter Bhagavad gita always keep on chanting my holy name So some people think this is an ordinary affair. Simply by chanting the names of Krishna what will happen? And some atheists still who are apparently they have some belief in God. No. Does any father say to the child that you chant papa, Papa, Papa at some movie had shown you simply ask the Father and Father will give you no. The devotee is not chanting for any demand. The devotee is serving the Lord in his incarnation of holy name. And he gets unlimited bliss simply by chanting the Holy Name. And the devotee is absorbed. When he is absorbed in chanting the Glories or chanting the names of God, he attains such an advanced platform spiritual status that nothing in this material world no laws of nature act upon such devotee. So prahlad maharaj is telling I do not need anything Maha amrita and when a person meditates upon singing the Glories glorifying the Lord chanting his qualities. So he feels a very great nectar within his heart. Maha Amrit. Amrit means nectar. A person feels unlimited happiness by coming in contact with nectar. And he becomes eternal and singing the glories of Lord are described by Prahlad Maharaj as Maha Amrita. Great Nectar. So I am absorbed in this great nectar. I am relishing your glories. So I do not have any problem in my life. However, because we are now affected by the influence of Maya as we'll be seeing in the next class. Srila Rup Goswami explains in next verse verse number seven how when a person is affected by Maya, maya creates such an illusion for the living entity that happiness is perceived as distress. Just like very tasty food appears bitter, the sugar candy sweet. It is supposed to be in nature. But when a person is affected by high jaundice, the sweet sugar candy appears bitter. The nature appears converse. It is sweet, it is appearing bitter. This is the influence of external energy. So ordinarily it may appear because all of us are conditioned by this illusion. So ordinarily in the beginning 1 may perceive oh, this is painful activity. It is painful to follow rules and regulations of the vedas. My life would become very very restricted. We don't understand. Our life is already so much restricted. Morning to evening we are forced to do some work much against our wish. So many desires I am forced. So so much restriction is already there. If the food is not there of my choice, I become disturbed. Is it not restriction, you are restricted by the food. If I am not able to watch my favorite match, football or cricket, I become disturbed. I become restless. Are you not restricted, controlled by it? If I do not have sufficient money, I lose money. I become disturbed. Are you not restricted by the money? Are you not being controlled by it? If there is some criticism, you are not able to tolerate, are you not restricted by it? If some other person says something unkind to you, are we not disturbed by it? So are we not restricted by other people? They are governing our behavior. So so much we are restricted. We are being controlled by so many ropes in the hand of various people. In the circumstances, money, name, fame, all these things are controlling us. Lust, anger, greed, helplessly living entities already helpless. Already he's so much restricted under illusion. He thinks so I am free. But actually when he follows these few basic restrictions, regulations which may appear like restriction just in the beginning then a person becomes used to doing these activities. Then he feels great pleasure in doing these activities. So just like a sugar candy appears bitter these activities initially a person has to follow as a matter of discipline. And very soon when followed strictly these activities give great pleasure to the living entity. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling Virgayan Mahamrita Magna Chitta I am experiencing extraordinary pleasure simply by chanting, singing your glories. So this is the secret. It is not ordinary instruction in the Bhagavad Gita, simply by chanting the names Glorifying Krishna a person becomes so powerful that he cannot be disturbed by a person who was able to push all the universal controllers, the devatas out of their places. So such a person could not disturb a small boy, five year old boy. This is the potency. The power enchanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra or the Glories of Lord. But Prahlad Maharaj then tells but yes, I have got one lamentation. This person has got the supreme bliss. He has got the most confidential knowledge. Doing that activity makes a person completely quarantined from all the disturbances of this world. But then what is this factor which is affecting him? Something which is causing great lamentation for such an advanced personality? So praladmaraj reveals shoche tato vimukuchetasa indriarto maya sukhai bharam udvhato vimurhan shoche means lamentation. Brahma bhuta prasan Natma NA shochati nakankshati. A person who has become Brahma bhuta who has realized aham brahmasmi. I am spirit soul Nasho chatina Kangshati. He does not lament after anything in this world. If you lose name, fame, property or people around you, you don't lament. Neither Kangshati, neither you hanker for anything. Because you understand you are not the body and everything belongs to Krishna. And getting these things do not satisfy me. I am spirit, soul only spiritual activity. Engaging myself in the service of supreme Spirit God does satisfy me. So brahma bhuta our self realized soul. He does not lament so Prahlad Maharaj but he is lamenting. Yes. So there is this unique lamentation present in the hearts of all such very exalted devotees also. And what is that lamentation? Vimukachaitasa indriyarto those people who have become Vimuk averse to you. And as soon as a person becomes averse to God he cannot relish this Maha. Amrita. The great nectar of engaging in service of Krishna remembering Him. Then what happens? We need some pleasure living entities. Then he starts taking pleasure in sense enjoyment. Shoche Tato Vimukachetasa Indriya Arthur indria artha means just for satisfying the senses. Maya Sukhai Bharam Udvahato Vimurhan I am just lamenting for these souls who are making their life miserable simply by indulging themselves in the process of enjoyment of senses which is not real pleasure which is Mayasuk. Maya Sukhai Bharam Udvhatovimurhan so actually there is no pleasure at all in enjoying the senses which includes the mind. Mind dictates us. It puts so many demands. And if we satisfy the demands of the mind if we satisfy the desires of the senses that is what is preached in the great universities and modern education as success. But Parallaad Maharaj tells no it is a trap like Duryodhan got trapped in the palace constructed by Maya demon. Land is taken as water, water as land. So it is Maya. So it is actually distress which is perceived as happiness. And the person, conditioned person is jumping person or animals, all the conditioned living entities like a moth dashing into fire thinking oh, this is my happiness. So in this way simply by indulging in sense enjoyment person creates more and more misery for himself. So that's why it's very very important to understand this knowledge of Vedas Bhagavad, Gita Srimad Bhagavatam and specifically all these festivals are supposed to be utilized for this purpose. At least on this day we learn these beautiful instructions. So in order to be saved from this illusory representation of happiness and distress in this material world, what is the solution? The solution is association of Brahmanda Brahmitekona Bhagavanjeev Guru Krishna Prasade Pai Bhaktilata Vij. Association of such devotees like Prahlad Maharaj who because of their intimate contact with the supreme creator are completely enlightened about the nature of this existence. So how to utilize their association that we have discussed in one of our previous sessions six principles of Satsang. So you can hear if you have missed it. And then not an ordinary devotee but a very exalted devotee should be chosen for applying these six principles that we discussed in the previous session. Elevation in Krishna consciousness and how we can attain that platform that also we discussed. But just like you are traveling in a flight, flight affords very very fast travel. But then there is great risk. If there is crash, nobody would survive. If there is malfunctioning, nobody can help it. In the air, death is certain. If you travel on a bullock cart, of course you cannot expect to travel fast. But there is no risk involved also. So this association of pure devotees affords a living entity chance of very great advancement whereby MRMA. Amritam Gamaya a person can solve the greatest problem of even deaths which modern science has got no clue solving death disease. This can be accomplished simply by this process of association with such exalted spiritualists like Prahlad Maharaj association of pure devotees. But there is one great risk involved and that is the greatest risk which a living entity has in this material world. And that greatest risk is called hathi mata or vaishnavaprad. What is this Vaishnavaprad? So it is told in the vedas when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was instructing sanatana Goswami, Rupa Goswami either of the brothers then he explained very nicely the various elements of devotional service. How we can take advantage of association of pure devotees. So only a pure devotee can be situated in perfect knowledge. Krishna tells because of their proximity, their intimate relationship with Krishna. Krishna reveals everything about himself. So that is why it is told. Shat Karma nipuno Vipra mantra Tantra Visharada Avaishnavo Guru Nasyat Vaishnava shopacho Guru so a teacher of the society is not supposed to take salary like teachers are taking today. So if anybody is taking salary, it means he needs some sense enjoyment for his own self. And he has no faith in God that God will maintain me. All these animals are maintained without any job. And I am supposed to be intelligent than animals. And I am working harder than animals for same physical maintenance which animals are having anyway very very easily without doing any job and any education. Facing Monday test and it Je and all those neat and CAS and all such examinations simply for eating, mating, sleeping, defending animals are able to do it without such rigor which we undergo. So that is why a teacher never does job. He understands Krishna maintains. And his only task is to understand Krishna and explain others about Krishna. So he is only supposed to be engaged in six activities as we have discussed. Patan Pathan Yajan Yajan Dhan Pratigra learning, educating, worshipping Lord telling others how to worship, accepting charity because he has no time to engage in vocational duties. And he accepts charity so that others may get chance to advance in Krishna consciousness. Because that money he again does charity out of it. He does not accumulate for his satisfaction in this we accept charity. Otherwise without charity also Krishna maintains such brahmanas. But however a person is very expert in these six features. Shat Karma Nipuna Vipra a person is very learned, very scholarly in the vedas and he is expert in these six activities. But scriptures are mentioning Mantra Tantra Visharadha he is very expert in mantras. Now there are three kinds of actually sciences mantra Tantra Yantra so now we are using Yantra. Yantra means machines. The machines are going in the outer space. The machines are performing some functions through machines we are able to see what is happening in some other part of the world. However, through mantra same thing can be accomplished through mantras. There are powerful personalities who can fly in the space. Through mantras various things can be conjured. Something which is there on the other planet, it can immediately be attained. So this is another science to Mantra tantra Visharada so a person is very very powerful. He can chant these wonderful mantras also. But still he should not be accepted as spiritual master. Even though he's performing magical feats. He's expert scholar. He's expert in six kinds of activities. So what is the qualification of being a guru? Vaishnava vaishnava guru Nasyat a person does not deserve to become spiritual master if he is not a vaishnava. This is the verdict of the Vedas. Vaishnava means devotee of Vishnu, Krishna or any of other expansions of Lord Vishnu and Vaishnava Shwapacho Guru. Some people tell oh, Guru should be born in a Brahmana family. Any person who does not belong to Brahmana caste cannot be Guru. This is a wrong notion. So that is why it is told in the Vedas avaishnavah Guru Nasyat and Vaishnava person is Vaishnava Shwapachoguru. Even though he has taken birth in the family of dog eaters he can be accepted as spiritual master. What is the logic? Prabhupada explains very simple. If there is a scientist, you don't ask his caste oh, you have taken birth in Christian family, christian science. I will not believe, I will not follow electricity. No, you take advantage. He is Christian or Jew or Hindu or atheist. If he knows science, then he's a scientist. In a similar fashion krishna tells in Bhagavad gita veda is chasarware aham eva vedyo. From all Vedas I am to be known. So any person that is why who knows Krishna, he knows the conclusion of Vedas. So that is why Vedas tell only a vaishnava should be taken as Guru should be taken as spiritual master. So when a person is very lucky to come in contact with such a vaishnava he can make solution to all the problems of life. But then there is this great risk involved, that of vaishnavaparad, what is called vaishnavaparad. So when he comes in contact with spiritual master, spiritual master offers him something. What does he offer? You will get your job very easily. You will get a beautiful husband or wife. You will have very good business. No spiritual master should be approached only for spiritual knowledge. And the spiritual knowledge a person gets when he engages in the service of Krishna, he does bhakti without bhakti. There is no question of real knowledge he can understand. I am not the body, not beyond that. So that is why all the knowledge is given to a person when a person engages in bhakti of Krishna because Krishna is the source. Vedant. Krit veda. Veda Chaham. I am the creator of Vedas. So Krishna bestows all the knowledge upon the devotee who engages in his loving service. So how a person engages in service guru gives the seed of devotional service. That is called bhakti lata bhij. And when this Bhakti lata bhakti is compared to cultivating a creeper a creeper originates from a seed. So this seed is given which is planted in the heart of the devotee. So just like a creeper, when it comes out you have to protect it very nicely. Some wild animal can come and some weeds can come. The weeds can choke the growth of creeper. That is why the farmers, they grow and they root out the weeds, pluck out the weeds. Otherwise same chanting and hearing will feed the weeds rather than the actual creeper. So thus bhakti is a great science and great guidance is required. There are six kinds of weeds described and a person should be very careful in avoiding those weeds. If a person is not offenseless in chanting and hearing the holy names chanting and hearing devotional service will give rise to weeds and that will eventually choke the Bhakti creeper. But the greatest danger to the bhakti creeper is so sometimes you have sown very nice plant and the plant grows becomes a tree, very strong tree. And after many many years the gardener he has cultivated this strong tree. Ordinary wind cannot do any harm, cannot uproot that tree. But if a mad elephant it enters the garden it can uproot any of such trees with its mighty force. So that is why vaishnavaprad is so strong. A person could have become very very advanced in his spiritual life. But all the spiritual assets are immediately taken away. They become zero and the bhaktis immediately stopped. If a person commits offense at the lotus feet of a vaishnava and there are many such instances so duryodhan and party were also vanquished because of this vaishnava. Prad. Even though a person is offending Krishna directly Krishna will tolerate. But if a person blasphemes, if a person criticizes or offends in any other way the devotees of Lord then just like a father can tolerate insults on himself but father cannot tolerate insults afflicted towards his child. In a similar fashion the devotees of Krishna who have surrendered their life and soul everything for Krishna's service. If a person physically, verbally or in any other way offends a vaishnava pure devotee then Krishna never tolerates. So duryodhana and Party kauravas they inflicted so much of troubles upon the Pandavas so Krishna decided they should be killed. And then Krishna guides the devotee in such a way that he increases his sinful activities, increases his offenses so that he is vanquished one day. So that is why Krishna encouraged the queens please laugh. Because unless they laugh he will not become angry. Unless he becomes angry, he will not decide to fight. And thus Krishna arranged all this plot very nicely. He told yes, please laugh, make fun of them. And another instance of vaishnavapra this chaitanya mahaprabhu lord Krishna Himself He came here to expand the Yugdharma of chanting the holy names. He gave holy name to everybody. And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted a personality as a spiritual master. Just imagine what would be the stature of that person. Ishwar Puri that God himself is accepting him as spiritual master. So how somebody can become such an exalted devotee that God is accepting him as spiritual master by very nicely engaging in service of his guru. So ishwar Puri in the final days of his spiritual master Madhvindra Puri served him very very nicely. He always encouraged him. He discussed the pastimes of Krishna in this way. He provided opportunity to Madhavindrapuri to develop and to engage in great bliss of Krishna consciousness. But then there was this another disciple. His name was Ram Chandrapuri. Both of them were disciples of Madhavindra Puri. Both of them had opportunity to come to a very extraordinary level in spiritual life. But when in the old age Madhavinder Puri he behaved like a conditioned living entity. That is why Rukh Goswami in this verse he is mentioning he has described very beautifully how to associate with the devotees in six ways how to understand who is an advanced devotee. And then he tells this understanding Drishta. Swabhavayer that if you try to observe the pure devotees from the material vision then what happens? We can perceive a pure devotee just as an ordinary living entity. So if you have read the small book perfect question, perfect answers. If you have nodded, please read it. So very nice small book. So one new person, Bob. He is asking Srila Prabhupada. He was a westerner and came to the west and he was staying with Prabhupada and asked very nice questions. So he wanted to understand why we are suffering. We are thinking oh, if I make some nice medicine, have advancement in sciences, I'll be happy. If I have some technology I'll be happy. So Prabhupada explained we are suffering because of karma laws of nature we break in the past. So whatever you may devise ways and means you will have to suffer. Unless you completely take shelter of God then your past karmas are nullified. So then he asked another interesting connected question oh, we are suffering because of karma. But then we see that the spiritual master guru also suffers. And how to understand this that guru is supposed to be a liberated person but guru is suffering. So Prabhupada explains yes, I am also suffering because of my bad activities. So this was contradictory. A guru is supposed to be a liberated person and he liberates the disciple from their bad karmas. How guru can do bad activity? Then he persisted. He asked then how to understand this? So Prabhupada explained yes it is my fault. It is my fault that I've accepted many many disciples who are not able to follow the rules and regulations nicely. So once when Prabhupada was. In Vrindavan. And it was the beginning of monsoon. And all the western disciples, they started falling sick. And as we understand, we fall sick. These are just the instruments. We fall sick because of our sinful activities. So all of them, they started getting malaria and so many other diseases. And in the evening there would be all kinds of moths, insects. And Prabhupada also got malaria. He became very, very sick and he collapsed on the bed, was not able to move much. Prabhupada had to be carried to the washroom. So how do we understand why the Spiritual Master liberated personality he's supposed to be? He is also suffering. Then Prabhupada explained I am suffering because many of the disciples are not following the rules and regulations properly, because they were Westerners and proper training was not there. And Spiritual Master, out of his great mercy, it is mentioned, he is so eager to deliver them from these material problems he initiates, he accepts as disciples unqualified candidates also. So some rules and regulations we have to follow. We should follow four regulative principles specially. And if a disciple is not able to follow, this is sinful activity. But one Spiritual Master gives diksha to you, initiation to you. Then he suffers for all the future sins also committed by the disciples. And how, why he suffers? He need not suffer, but he suffers so that disciples may be cautious. If I commit sinful activity, spiritual master has to suffer. So thus Prabhupada explained this is the reason of my suffering. This disease has come because so disciples became very aware and all of them started following rules and regulations very, very strictly. So thus we have to understand that the body of Spiritual Master, it looks like a material body, but that is not material body of Spiritual Master is completely spiritual. How is it spiritual? Spiritual in the sense, although, yes, the Spiritual Master accepts a body which is made up of material elements, but those material elements, because they are constantly engaged in the service of Krishna, his body, mind, everything. Because of in constant association with Krishna, the entire body is completely spiritualized of the Spiritual Master. So an example which is given in the vedas by the Acharyas is just like an iron rod. If it is kept in fire, the iron rod starts behaving like fire, it starts emitting heat and light. If you touch it, you will get burnt. In a similar fashion, although iron in ordinary circumstance cannot emit heat and light, but if it is in contact with fire, it starts acting like fire, starts emitting heat and light in a similar fashion. Although this body is made up of material ingredients, if a person with mind, body and speech, if constantly it is engaged in the service of Krishna, this entire body starts behaving spiritually. So a Spiritual Master is not at all affected by birth, death, old age and disease. Any such miseries. However, under the influence of Maya. Thus Prabhupada tells the servant of spiritual master and the Pujari in the temple who is in close proximity with the deity. These two are the positions of greatest danger in the spiritual life. Why? Because familiarity breeds contempt. On this principle Maya acts and then the person can become familiar. So it is told in Padmapuran or Vishnu Puran either of the Puranas. Arche Vishnu Shiladhir Guru Shundar Matir Vaishnavi Jati Buddhir arche Vishnu Shiladhir if a person thinks the arch form the deity in the temple is stone Shila as many people think, why you are worshipping stone in the temple? Why you are spending money? So no, that is a very great mistake. It is called Arch Avatar. When Krishna appeared here 5000 years ago, not everybody understood that he is Krishna. And many people took him to be an ordinary human being. So Krishna does these for two purposes. Those who are offenders, those who are sinful, Krishna encourages them to do further offenses and those who are devotees, Krishna wants to save them. So Krishna does some extraordinary activities also which no human being can perform. Like lifting mountain, like dancing on the hoods of Kalya the great serpent like killing, he was very small boy throwing his legs in the air and he was able to dismantle a cart. Demon was taking shelter of the cart and Putana who was having mystic power of expanding her body to many miles. She was also killed by Krishna when Krishna was merely few months old. So all these activities no ordinary human being can perform, krishna performed at the same time Krishna was crying in hunger. And hunger is supposed to be an influence of Maya. What to speak of Krishna? Even devotees of Krishna when Shukhda Goswami was explaining, Maharaj parishit was hearing, none of them were eating, drinking anything. So just by hearing about Krishna devotee can attain such a status. He will not feel like eating or sleeping at all. They can come in Samadhi simply by hearing and describing about Krishna. Shukde goswami. Maharaj Parishit gave the example. How come Krishna is then asking for hunger? Give me butter, give me milk. He is crying no. So thus Krishna does some activities so that the devotees get a chance to engage in the service of Krishna. Unless Krishna cries out of hunger, where is the opportunity for mother Yashoda NAN Maharaj to feed him, to take care of him? Unless Krishna behaves like an ordinary child, where is the opportunity for his father to act in protection? So the devotees want to express their loving emotions. And if Krishna shows his unlimited power, where is the opportunity for the devotees to render any service to Krishna? And unless they render service to Krishna, there was no satisfaction in their life. So thus Krishna behaves as an ordinary person to give a chance to the living entities to render service. This point is very very important to understand. Thus when krishna comes, he falls sick also. And he does all these ordinary activities so that the devotees can get a chance. In a similar fashion are the activities of spiritual master. It is mentioned in the Vedas. A disciple who is foolish. He may think that the spiritual master has become invalid. Thus he is dependent upon the services of the disciple. But he is not able to understand. It is an opportunity rendered by the spiritual master. So spiritual master is all powerful. When Prabhupada explained Bhakti Vinod's Thakur dream was there that this Hare Krishna mantra be spread throughout the universe. And in the universe, everybody's chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra in this world, various people across the various nations and Bhakti Viru Thakur predicted the Westerners would come. They would learn Bengali, to learn Chaitanya Charitamrita with banners in their hand. The Germans, the French and all these Americans will come here and they would chant the names of Krishna he had predicted. So the disciple asked Prabhupada and bhakti nutakuri prayed that Krishna, I am not powerful. So please send me somebody from your close group, your associates who can accomplish this feat. So he was blessed with a child, bhaktis Dhansarasvati, who became a very strong preacher. And then eventually Srila Prabhupada. So Prabhupada explained. Bhakti vinod Thakur did not do this. He is vaishnava. He is all powerful. He could have accomplished everything single handedly, just like Krishna. When Arjuna told Krishna, I do not want to fight, krishna told I have killed them already. But if you want credit, you can act and thus you become as a famous hero. Otherwise, Krishna had already killed everybody. They are not going to go alive from this battlefield. Krishna declared. So thus Krishna's plan is acting in this world. But Krishna gives chance to his devotees. Just like a father wants, my son should become more than me. In a similar fashion, the devotee is always trying to glorify Krishna. This is very important. This is the secret of happiness. Do not try to become yourself famous. Do not try to become yourself opulent. Use opulence for Krishna. Try to make Krishna famous. Spread this knowledge of Krishna everywhere. So devotee is trying to serve Krishna and Krishna is trying to serve devotee. Devotee wants to make Krishna famous. Krishna wants to make his devotee famous. In this way it is told in Chattaran Charitamrita duay lagay Hurahuri there is a great competition between the devotee and Krishna. Devotee wants to serve Krishna and Krishna wants to serve devotee. There is competition who can serve the other person more. This is the loving relationship. And when God wants to serve you, just imagine what is your position in life. This is the sublime feature of Bhakti yoga, the culmination of spiritual knowledge, spiritual life. So in this way we have to understand that an opportunity is offered. Bhakti Vinod Thakur gave opportunity to other devotees that you become famous. Bhakti sdant maharaj, you become famous. Prabhupada you become famous. So in a similar fashion spiritual master can do anything. He is endowed with all the mystic opulences. Although we can see Prabhupada behaving ordinarily falling sick and taking service from disciples. At other times Prabhupada behaved extraordinarily. So once Prabhupada was walking and the ground was wet. And there are supposed to be impressions on the ground. Everybody is walking, they are making impressions. But of course you may believe it or not but this is the pastime experienced by the devotees. So then this devotee was there. And she told Prabhupada there are no footsteps of your walking. So Prabhupada told everything will be revealed to you in course of time. And it is told about the devatas that when they come here they don't step on the foot, they don't step on the ground, they are just floating. And many such other instances are till now you may or may not believe. And Prabhupada would be walking with disciples. And disciple is thinking of something. Immediately Prabhupada would speak the mind of the disciple. And disciple is surprised. Oh my God. So that is why devotees were very very scared about going in front of Prabhupada. Because Prabhupada would penetrate and see everything that is happening within the heart. And Prabhupada was asked also so Prabhupada, is it true that spiritual master can know the heart of the disciple? So Prabhupada told yes, it is not extraordinary for a very advanced devotee to know what is happening in the heart of the disciples. So the disciple asked so Prabhupada, you also can know what is happening in the hearts of the disciple. So Prabhupada told, I did not say that. I told advanced devotees can do that very very easily. I am not an advanced devotee. I am not even a devotee. I am trying to become devotee. So Prabhupada explained the principle that yes, an advanced devotee can do that and spiritual master is an advanced devotee. At the same time he explained the consciousness of advanced devotee. The devotee is actually advanced when he thinks I am not advanced at all. I am not even a devotee at all. I am trying to become a devotee. So thus when devotees would experience devotees thinking something and Prabhupada would speak their mind immediately. So devotees were very scared. So that is why when they would go in front of Prabhupada devotees would just try to think of Krishna within their heart. So that we commit so many other mistakes. Prabhupada, they were afraid. Prabhupada, if he sees what all contamination we carry in our heart what he would think. So they were thinking intensely of Krishna when they were going in front of Prabhupada. And like this various pastimes are there. Prabhupada can see from a great distance what is happening which devotees are not able to figure out. And many such things are there. So there are extraordinary pastimes also. And there are apparently ordinary pastimes. So these ordinary pastimes of Krishna are there to bewilder the atheist and to save the devotees. Krishna has two missions paritranai Sadhunam, Vina, Shai Cha Dushkritam so those people who are envious of Krishna, they want to become enemy of Krishna, become demons. They are facilitated to commit more offenses by thinking spiritual master or Krishna is ordinary. And those who are devotees, extraordinary features are revealed to them. So thus all these activities are there to afford the devotees. Spiritual master is old, so disciples are offering him seva. If the spiritual master shows all his mystic powers, it is told Narad Muni told Dhru Maharaj you chant this Krishna mantra, you will attain this spiritual planet. He himself could have given that planet to Dhru Maharaj bhagavata mentions but this is not the duty of spiritual master. The duty of spiritual master is to engage the disciple in the service of Krishna. And that spiritual master, he does it through himself. Because we cannot see Krishna directly, he accepts service and then he passes it on to Krishna. So spiritual master behaves perfectly and he is actually perfect. Then where is the chance for disciples to do anything? Spiritual master can expand himself, go and preach everyone, make everyone devotee. Then where is the chance for us? What is the seva left for us? So thus just to engage us in seva. This is the version of Shastra. That is why it is told Arche Vishnu Shiladhi Gurushu Narmati shastras are telling Gurushu Narmati so do not think that Krishna standing in the altar is stone. He appears like stone because we cannot see spirit. Just like Krishna takes a form which appears like a human being 5000 years ago he did that Krishna takes a form which appears like stone. As simple as that. He can take any form. He can take form of animal, form of human being, form of stone, wood or anything. But these are all Krishna only in a similar fashion. Guru Shu Narmati if somebody thinks that Guru is ordinary human being then there is a very great offense vaishnavi Jati Buddhir and he thinks Vaishnavas belong to certain Jati. Thus in many temples in India when Prabhupada would bring his disciples, they would not allow entry. Prabhupada told Vaishnav Jati buddhi, they are thinking Vaishnav belongs to some Jati. This is a great offense. They don't read the vedas. We should not think Vaishnav is belonging to any Jati. He is not the body. He belongs to Achuta Gotra. He does not belong to any Gotras of this world. Vishnurva Vaishnavanam Kalimal Mathanay Padhatirthe Ambubuddhi if a person thinks the water which has washed the lotus feet of Guru ordinary water or the water which has washed the lotus feet of Krishna or the Ganges the river which is coming from lotus feet of Krishna as ordinary water and Sri Vishnu namani Sakal Kalushahe Shabda samana Buddhir the names of Lord Vishnu which is destroying all Nasians he considers considers it as Shabdha Samani Buddhir as an ordinary sound. As people would tell why can I not chant Johnny Johnny or 1234 instead of chanting the names of Krishna they think this chanting of Krishna's name this Krishna sound is an ordinary sound. Just like this stone in the temple or spiritual master he is having a material body. So that is why we should understand. We are sick. We cannot understand what is tasty food for us tasty food is bitter. We are blind. Colorblind person mistakes one color for another. In a similar fashion why should we depend upon one's senses to ascertain what is truth. Duryodhan could not assert from his senses what is land and what is water. That is why it is told Pashyati Shastra Chakshusha we should see from the eyes of the Shastras. Creator manufacturer has created this world and he has given the guideline. This is spirit, this is matter, this is land, this is water, this is happiness and this is distress. This is spiritual and this is material. Simply we have to follow read the Shastras and see the world from the eyes of the Shastras. We cannot see spirit within this body but from the Shastras we have to understand we are the spirit within the body. And then slowly when we advance then we can see also. But initially we have to see from the eyes of the Shastras. So we should not think shabda. Samana Buddhir. This name of Krishna is ordinary name. So all these are expansions of Krishna to deliver the living entity from the clutches of ignorance and suffering. So Duryodhan and party was destroyed because of Vaishnavaprads. And the picture which you would have seen on the creative this is the picture of Ram Chandrapuri. So we are discussing about ishwarpuri how serving Madhavindrapunis in his old age he got opportunity to become spiritual master of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. But at the same time another person he was called Ram Chandra Puri. He gave suggestion to spiritual master Madhavindra puri was crying in separation krishna where are you? Where are you? And he gives suggestion krishna is everywhere why you are crying? Something like that. So to offer suggestion to spiritual master it's also an offense. And he told Krishna Brahma is there everywhere. You meditate upon Brahma like that. He gave suggestions. So Madhavindra became very angry. Anyway I am feeling lamentation from Krishna. I am feeling separation from Mathura. I am not in mathura. And this foolish person is suggesting me like this. Because of this offense of trying to preach spiritual master offer him suggestions. He became a very very offensive personality that his habit became criticizing the devotees and criticizing Lord Chaitanya. He did not leave supreme personality also just by doing this small offense of displeasing his spiritual master at the fag end of his life. So then Ram Chandrapuri when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was there he was because of this mentality this offensive mentality he became impersonalist. So just imagine disciple of pure devotee became impersonalist Maya Vadi. He lost the understanding that God is having a form. He started simply thinking God in terms of energy. And then he started offending the devotees and he wanted to offend Mahaprabhu also. But he was not able to find any fault in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So then he would call his disciples and the disciples are regulated in their eating. But then he would request them please take more no, eat very nicely. And so Gaddadar Pandit was telling no but then he was elderly on the level of spiritual master of Mahaprabhu he accepted. When he accepted, he criticized. See, I know this chaitanya's followers, they eat a lot. I know this is their practice. So in this way first of all he will overfeed and then he will criticize that you are eating more. And then Chaitanymapro he got to know. So he reduced his diet further. He started eating half or one fourth something of what he was taking regularly. So then Ram Chandra Puri, he came to serve Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He wanted to find fall with Mahaprabhu. So Mahaprabhu anyway he had reduced his diet. So when Chattana Mahaprabhu when Ram Chandrapuri noticed Mahaprabhu had reduced his diet. So he started quoting Shloka from Bhagavad gita yuktaharaviharasya yukta cheshta sekarmasu yukta sapnava bodhasa yoga bhati dukah that eating less. A person cannot become a yogi. A person should not eat more, should not eat less also. So you do not know the principles and you are behaving like a sannyasi. In this way again he criticized you eat more, he will criticize. You eat less, he will criticize. And then so he was not able to criticize Mahaprabhu. Then one day in the place Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was staying he found some ants crawling. Then he started criticizing oh, you are hiding sweets, you are a sannyasi, you are hiding sweets. What you will control your senses. In this way he started criticizing. And thus in this way he completely lost his spiritual life. So thus this aparad is very very dangerous. So one disciple becomes spiritual master of God himself when he comes as Lord Chaitanya. And another disciple who could have got the same chance he lost his spiritual life completely because of this offense. So one should be very very cautious of dealing with the Vaishnavas. So that is why Vaishnavas are very very dear to Krishna. Krishna tells apiche sudura charu Bhajate mamane bhak sadhuri vasamantabhya So the disciples told a pastime when Prabhupada had come to India, especially in Gujarat because influence of Dwarka, they are very great devotees. So Prabhupada stayed in the house of one of the supporters and Prabhupada stayed with all his western disciples. And the western disciples were new and they were not knowing much of the Indian culture. And thus they were falling sick because of the Indian weather. And their behavior was not up to the mark like a Vaishnavi is supposed to behave. And sometimes everything was over and they could not consider that something has to be left for the hosts also to eat. And then they would again recook and would remain hungry for a long time. And they started serving. All the Sikh Vaishnavas and tolerating not so nice behavior of the devotees also. And then, when it was time for Prabhupada to leave this person, the host, he fell at the feet of Prabhupada and he started crying. Please. Forgive me for my offenses. Please excuse me. So Prabhupada told the devotees see, this is a vaishnava. So he was supposed any ordinary person could have taken offense. These people from where they have come wearing the dress of sadhu don't know how to behave like Sadhu but he started crying and begging pardon for the offenses unknowingly he would have committed so this is Vaishnava behavior actually and Krishna also tells in bhagavad gita apiche sudhura charu Bhajat a person who is completely engaged, dedicated his life to serve Krishna Sadhur Ava, samanthavya he is Sadhu. Only. He should be considered spiritualist, a devotee and no offense should be done against him. Just like a person, a child. Becomes very dear to Father, despite all his faults. If you do something to the child, Father will take offense. So, because they are engaged in service of Krishna, very soon, bhavati Dharmatma, they will become very rightly situated. But meanwhile because of their past habits very bad activity also they are doing Sudhura charu krishna is telling if they are engaged in my service they are sadhu dare not criticize them otherwise our life would be finished so not just one spiritual life becomes finished. It is told in Chaitanya Charitamrita there was another Ram Chandra Khan who offended Haridas Thakur and because of this, entire village got plundered very badly. So this vaishnavapra is so dangerous. Not just the person suffers. Entire family suffers. Entire village or town also suffers. So whenever we see any vaishnava, anybody who is chanting the name of Krishna and what to speak of? Person who has dedicated his life to serve Krishna. We should be very very cautious even though some very sudharachar, very abominable behavior is also displayed still a person should tolerate because this person has become very dear to Krishna unless somebody is dear to Krishna, nobody can dedicate his life for the seva. So that is why it is told a person should never take to physical offenses, fighting or doing this thing. He should never speak anything offensive. Rather, it is told in the Hari Bhakti Villas that if a person is not happy in seeing the Vaishnavas, that is also considered vaishnavaparad. So as soon as we see the Vaishnavas, we should become very happy. Actually, seeing the Vaishnavas makes us advanced in spiritual life. So all these things are very, very important. Yes, association of devotees makes us advance very fast. But if we are not careful in dealing with them, we do certain behavior, speak certain things which offends the other devotee. The devotees may not take offense. But Krishna notices oh, he has not behaved properly. So our spiritual life, whatever how much advancement we have made, it is stopped immediately. And a person suffers materially also. So we should be very very cautious. So please understand the six principles of satsung. Understand who is advanced devotee, whom to take satsung from and be very very cautious. Behave very respectfully with the devotees trying to serve in whatever way possible. Never feel offended by whatever way they may behave. And try to avoid committing any offenses. And by the way, still we may commit offenses because we also have got force of nature immediately. The remedy to be saved from such offenses go and fall at the feet of ashnava and beg. Excuse Do, dandavat, Pranam, Vancha, Kalpatar Bhisha we tell this thing, chant this mantra please excuse me for my offense. In this way by pleading the vaishnava we can be saved from the risk of vaishnavance. So this is the greatest risk of this very very extraordinary process of spiritual advancement which is the association of pure devotees. So with this we will end. And now there is very nice kirtan for all of you kirtan chanting, hearing the names of God is the way is the Yugdharma for this age. So try to hear very very nicely and try to sing also in the same tune you would see the lead singer singing here. Try to absorb yourself completely in the kirtan and after that we will take up questions. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna hari Kiram. Gamma Hariham. Hari Krishna hare Krishna Krishna Krishna hari. Hari hari Ram hari Ram Ram hari kari Krishna hare Krishna Krishna Krishna harika Ram. Harika hari. Shri Krishna. Hari hari. Nam Krishna. Hare Krishna krishna krishna. Hare hare Ram. Halle Krishna krishna Krishna hallel Krishna Krishna krishna krishna. Hare Hare hare Ram. Hare Ram. Ram ram. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna krishna krishna. Hare hare hare Ram. Hare Rama. Rama Ramahari hare Krishna. Hare Krishna krishna krishna. Hare hare hare Ram. Hare Ram. Ram har Hare hare Ram. Hare Ram. Ram ram Ram. Hare Krishna hare Krishna Krishna Krishna hare Hare Hare Ram hare Rama Rama Rama Krishna Krishna hari hari Hari Ram Krishna hare Krishna Krishna Krishna hare Hare hare Ram hare LamaRam Krishna Krishna hari Hari Ram Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna krishna. Hare Hare hare Ram. Hare, Ram, Rama, Ramah, Hari, Ram, Ram, Ram Hari hari hari Krishna hari Krishna krishna Krishna hari Ram Hare Krishna. I hope It was very nice listening to Such. Wonderful kirtan. So please do this kirtan every day. Sit with your family members. Take advantage of lockdown on Narsima Chaturdashi Singh entire day as much as possible. Sing for vanar. Read Bhagavatam vanar again. Sing for vanar in this way entire day. Try to engage in Harikestan. Okay. So questions you can start posting now in the chat. First question is by deepak Vichare. What are different types of offenses against vaishnava? And which is the highest offense. So I think you would have heard we discussed in the session. The vaishnava offense begins with if you are not just it begins in the mind, you are not happy seeing a vaishnava. So one should be immediately delighted seeing a vaishnava. It starts from there. And then if you impede the activities of a vaishnava or do something that may cause him any kind of disturbance, that is offense. If you speak something directly which is offending the vaishnava, that is verbal offense. Physically, if you do, then that is even greater offense. And killing the vaishnava is the greatest vaishnav offense. So these are the various types of vaishnavances. Next is by Ajay Raj Sharma. Why Krishna's father designed dukhalayam for us as his children? Is it necessary to have pain in life? Can't we realize God when everything is going good? Why suffering is the only way? No, it is not at all necessary to have pain in life. Rather, Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita if you simply follow these instructions if you simply become conscious of MEASI, you will cross over all the obstacles. But when we become like animals animal unless it is beaten very nicely, you tell excuse me, can you please move aside? Animal will not give way. Animal has to be beaten in a similar fashion. When we become dull like animals, that varies happiness in material enjoyment. It simply makes me addicted. And when a person cannot understand this simple thing god has got a form. I have got a form. So my origin should have form. He is a person. And what is the desire of person? Why? I have desire that I should be with my children. My children should serve me and we should lovingly stay together. I have this tendency because my origin should have this tendency. God has this tendency. So why am I not serving God? I am doing all the activities in this world but I do not have time to serve God. He loves me so much. Why do we love our children? This tendency is coming from God. Have you ever thought of reciprocating back to God? Every moment. He's applying so much of air to us, so much of food, water, life after life he is taking care fulfill all our desires. Have we ever done something in gratitude, spent some time for him? When a living entity does not do that, then he creates misery for himself by not listening to God. God does not create misery for us. The vedas are so nicely written. If we follow, we'll come in this world, we'll fulfill whatever desires we have and then we'll go back without misery. But we create miseries by not following God. So please follow and there would be no misery. Next is by Lahari. Hare Krishna, prabhuji. Why not? All people consider Chaitanya Mahaprabhu as Krishna's incarnation. Because they do not have knowledge. Even when Krishna was present, very few. People that took him to be God others took him to a powerful man, politician or a cowhide boy. XYZ even Brahma could not understand Krishna is God. Even Indra could not understand Krishna is God. So very limited. That is why unless somebody is devotee, he cannot understand who is God. Naham Prakasha krishna Reveals in Bhagavad Gita naham Prakasha saravasya Yogumaya Samavha so I am not revealed to envious people here. I am covered by my internal potency. Why? Because we have envy. Our heart burns hearing about God. We are all very envious in this material world. So we don't like to see Krishna. So Krishna is sanctioning our desire by not coming before us. How we are envious because we don't follow Krishna till Sara, Dharman, parityA JAMA Mekam, Shananam Raja forget all the duties, surrender unto me, engage in my service and we ask so many questions. Oh why should I surrender? Why should I do it? We'll do everything. We'll surrender to anybody. We'll surrender to any great leader. We'll surrender to so many politicians. We will surrender to our dog. We'll put all the property in dog's name. But we will not surrender to God. We'll follow my boyfriend, my girlfriend. They tell us please come to this hotel. We have to go. They tell please roam around with me here I will roam around. But when God tells please spend some time with me. Oh no. When Prabhupada explains, you come house and wife asks money and very happily. Yes, take everything. Everything I want for you. You spend everything. But when Krishna asks oh why Krishna is asking and why Krishna should demand so much? This is called envy. We are not willing to surrender everything to God which we do regularly for our family members. So as long as we keep this envy within the heart, we will not be able to understand Krishna. This is the reason why people are not able to understand Krishna Lord Chaitanya as God. But simply if they become devotee, they read the scriptures, it is easy to understand. This question is by Virendrag Bhote. Does spiritual master or Guru has been given special or divine powers by God which saves his disciples from the trap of Maya and make them transcend material world? Yes. Next question is by Lahari Prabhuji. How to become so humble by chanting the Holy Names offenselessly? Next is by Ashwin Srinivasan Hare Krishna. Prabhu, can you please enlighten us how Prabhupada converted Hippies to pure devotees as it was difficult since they had so many bad habits. This is the symptom of a Vaishnava. You can do anything. You can turn steel into gold but you cannot turn a materialist into a pure devotee of Krishna. So this can only be done by a person who is carrying Krishna within his heart who is a pure devotee. By this we can understand who is pure devotee who is in Acharya. It is told in the Vedas by seeing how he is able to convert the hearts of people. This is the symptom. He is real guru. Next question is by Sorav currently I'm doing two rounds. Can I jump to 16 rounds as I am feeling inspired by your lecture? I did 16 rounds before but my parents put me under medication if they see me engaging in devotional service. So please be careful. Sometimes parents may not understand like Pralad Maraj's father could not understand. So in such difficult situations try if your parents can speak to some devotees because it is natural for them also to get worried. Because mostly in the garb of spiritualists people cheat and either they run some personal agenda, sense enjoyment or some politics but never pure spiritual life. So try to bring them in association of devotees or if that is not possible, then please use your intelligence but avoid such confrontation. Anybody can think that the person has gone mad, isn't it? Who spends so many hours for Krishna's service? So use your intelligence. Don't create any unpleasant circumstances. But yes, 16 rounds. Please try to do krishna will give you intelligence. How to do it avoiding any unpleasant situation. Next is by Virendrag Bhutte if unknowingly we have committed offense against a Vaishnava such as fault finding then will Krishna forgive us? Krishna in the nine chapter says that I forgive abominable action of devotee. If is in devotion, Krishna will not forgive Vaishnavara. We have to go and take the blessings of the Vaishnava and beg excuse from that Vaishnava whom we have offended engage in their service. Next is by Vishwajit Singh Hare Krishna prabhu prabhu if you may explain about tolerance in detail I am not able to understand Titikshava principle. When we are in devotee community how we can practice it? So for detail you can please contact Shisha Govind Prabhu I will share the number double 9678 double 0542 and because here time is limited, it is very good question. You should understand this Titikshawa principle. Unless we follow this principle, advancement is tough. So Prabhu will explain you or connect to some other mentors who can guide you in spiritual life. Next is by Anushka Shanbhag why does Krishna further bewilder the atheists? Why is the curtain of Maya put between us and the Lord? Wouldn't it become more easy for people to believe in God if there was no Maya as we just discussed? Because we are envious of to, we cannot tolerate Krishna being God. So if we become non envious just like how do we understand non envious? Person is willing to surrender everything to the people he love. So when we have such tendencies Saradharman Parityaja we can offer everything to Krishna. We become perfectly obedient. Develop attachment for Krishna. Krishna will immediately remove the curtain. He is much much more eager. So atheist wants to become atheist so Krishna sanctions his desire. Next is by Vinayak Churasia Hari Krishna Prabhuji now I'm not getting taste in chanting and I can't complete 60 rounds of chanting. Please help. How it happened, please explain. It can happen for various reasons. As we discussed today, Vashnavarath can be one reason or simply our lack of strictness can be one reason. If we break regulative principles then we lose taste in chanting the Holy Name. So that is why following regulative principles is very important. If we become inattentive, then again it may feel burdensome. So either we are breaking the regulative principles or doing Vaishna offenses or simply because of Tamuguna we have become very lazy. Determination is required. So because of this chanting has reduced. So don't worry. Start again and try to hear again. Attentively Next is by Anushka Shanbhag. Why was Ram Chandra Puri given such a bad punishment? Wasn't he also a devotee if not a pure devotee? Yes, he was a devotee but then he committed offense. So Krishna that is why he does not tolerate. A pure devotee will not cause anybody's destruction. If a pure devotee curses also like Narad Muni cursed Nalkuar Mani gave to become trees and eventually it was for them to gain pure devotion and they became liberated. So pure devotees curse is also for benefit. But Krishna, when he sees he is not respecting my child, my pure devotee Krishna does not tolerate so that is why it is very very dangerous. So such a strict punishment was given because Krishna could not tolerate offense against such an exalted devotee as Madhavindar Puri. Next is by Rahul Kumar. Say Rabuji by mistake today on Ekadashi I plugged tulsi leaves later on I apologize. But is it also vaishnavrad? No, it is not. An Aprad and tulsi leaves can be plugged on Ekadashi. Although there are some scriptures which may give some regulations. But if we follow Srila Prabhupada, such a prohibition is not there. Next is by Kanojiya. Kanojiya? Hare Krishna prabhuji. How could such impurity come in vaishnava? As we can see in the case of Ramchandra, so impurity is always there in us. So that is why we should not get carried away by the impurities. If I know that I am colorblind, who has given us authority to define colors? If I know I am sick, who has given us authority to define which food is tasty in a similar fashion if I know I am not liberated personality, who has given us authority to judge the Vashnavas? Another liberated personality. So contamination we all have. So we should use intelligence just like a small child. So he strictly follows the instructions of the father. Father does do not eat anything given by a stranger. If he eats, he'll get kidnapped. He is weak. So we should understand our contamination, our weakness. And thus very very strictly follow rules and regulations. So thus behaving with the Vaishnavas in a proper way. Not offering suggestion advice and thus creating unnecessary offenses is one of the very important rule. Next is by Vineet Gupta. How can we become Krishna conscious. When we have to take care of our family and work or business. So there is no difficulty. Krishna consciousness does not mean that all of you have to become like us monks. So just like Arjun arjun was a family man. He fought for Krishna. And Srila Prabhupada was doing business in his previous life. So in this way we can do whatever duties we are doing. And Krishna tells in Bhagavad gita sway sway karmana Avirata siddhim vindatimanawa siddhim means perfection can be attained by doing one's own duties very nicely. How? By offering the results of those duties in the service of Krishna. So we are not telling that everybody should shave his head and do this thing. Neither that is possible. So the policy is wherever we are, we are living in family. We are doing business, job. Whatever. The results of those activities should be offered to Krishna. That's it. And chant and hear the names of Krishna. Understand the vedas in the association of devotees. That's it. Chanting and hearing in devotee association offering the results to Krishna. Whatever activity you are doing that will make your spiritual life perfect. You will be perfectly Krishna conscious. Next is by Ajay Raj Sharma. Is mind solely responsible for bondage or liberation? Why and how? Yes. Mind when forgets Krishna, it is responsible for bondage. Mind when remembers Krishna or remembers the pure devotee of Krishna. It is always contemplating on the instructions of Krishna. Then that is the cause of liberation. So thank you so much for all your questions. Now the time is up. Please keep on chanting. Always celebrate.